The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Yellow Frigate, by James Grant

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: The Yellow Frigate
       or, The Three Sisters

Author: James Grant

Release Date: May 22, 2021 [eBook #65415]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

Produced by: Al Haines

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE YELLOW FRIGATE ***






  THE

  YELLOW FRIGATE

  OR

  _THE THREE SISTERS_



  BY

  JAMES GRANT

  AUTHOR OF "THE ROMANCE OF WAR"



  LONDON
  GEORGE ROUTLEDGE AND SONS, LIMITED
  NEW YORK: E. P. BUTTON AND CO.




INTRODUCTION.

In that broad and magnificent valley which separates chain of the
Grampians from the Ochil Mountains, close by the margin of the Allan,
and sequestered among venerable trees, lies the pleasant and peaceful
little village of Dunblane, in Scotland's elder days an old cathedral
city.  Northward of the limpid Allan lie purple heaths, black swamps,
and desert muirs.  An old bridge which spans the river, and was built
in the time of King Robert III., by "the Most Reverend Father in
God," Findlay Dermach, bishop of the see, with a few ancient houses,
having quaint chimneys and crow-stepped gables, that peep on the
steep brae-side from among the shady beeches, are all that survive of
Dunblane; but over those remains rise the grey ruins of King David's
vast cathedral, of which nothing now is standing but the roofless
nave, with its shattered aisles, and the crumbling but lofty gothic
tower.

The gleds and corbies that flap their wings between the deserted
walls; the swallows that twitter on the carved pillars, or build
their nests among the rich oakwork of the prebends' stalls, with the
grass-grown floor and empty windows of this magnificent ruin, impress
the mind of the visitor with that melancholy which is congenial to
such a place.  But it is neither the recumbent figure of a knight in
armour, with his sword and triangular shield, marking where the once
powerful Lord of Strathallan sleeps, not the burial-place of the
Dukes of Athol, blazoned with the silver star of the Murrays, that
are the most interesting features in this old ruin.

It is not the fine west window which overlooks the wooded path that
winds by the river-side, and is known as "the Good Bishop's walk,"
nor the ruined shrine where sleeps St. Blane of Bute--he whose boat
sailed upon the Clyde without sail or oar; he who (as the veracious
Breviary of Aberdeen tells us) struck fire with his fingers when the
vesper lights went out; and who raised from the dead the English heir
of Appleby and Trodyngham, that attract most particularly the
attention of visitors, but _three plain slabs_ of blue marble, that
lie side by side on the grassy floor, and nestling, as it were,
together, as if to show that those they cover had loved each other in
life too well to be separated even in death.

The fall of the ponderous and once magnificent roof; the action of
the weather, and the footsteps of visitors, have defaced the legends
that were originally carved there; but the memory of those who sleep
below these marble labs yet lingers in Dunblane and Strathearn.

Under the first lies the affianced bride of one who was a good and
valiant soldier, and faithful to his king.

Under the second lies the betrothed of a stout Scottish mariner, as
brave a fellow as ever faced salt wator or cannon-shot.

Under the third sleeps the youngest--she who perhaps was the
fairest--the wife (but not the queen) of one who in his time was the
most gallant and magnificent monarch that ever wore the Scottish
diadem.

These three ladies were sisters; and their story is a strange and a
dark one.

History, tradition, and an old manuscript, that was found (no matter
when) among the Records of the Scottish Court of Admiralty, have
enabled me to lay their lives and narrative before the reader in the
following pages.




  CONTENTS.


  I. ON BOARD
  II. THE SWASHBUCKLER
  III. BONNY DUNDEE
  IV. THE SISTERS
  V. JAMES III
  VI. PALACE OF SAINT MARGARET
  VII. MARGARET DRUMMOND
  VIII. THE FISHERMAN OF BROUGHTY
  IX. THE BANE OF SCOTLAND
  X. THE BOATSWAIN'S YARN
  XI. CHAINING THE UNICORN
  XII. EMBASSY OF THE SIEUR DE MONIPENNIE
  XIII. TO SEA!
  XIV. THE OGRE OF ANGUS
  XV. CONCLAVE OF MALCONTENTS
  XVI. ANOTHER SON-IN-LAW
  XVII. THE WARLOCK OF BALWEARIE
  XVIII. FATHER AND SON
  XIX. HOW BORTHWICK FULFILLED HIS PROMISE
  XX. WOOD MEETS HOWARD
  XXI. THE PRICE OF THREE TENEMENTS
  XXII. THE SILKEN CORD
  XXIII. LORD DRUMMOND AND ROBERT BARTON
  XXIV. DAVID FALCONER
  XXV. HOWARD AND MARGARET
  XXVI. THE CHAPLAIN'S CABIN
  XXVII. THE ISLES OF THE FORTH
  XXVIII. THE FIRST SCOTTISH REVOLUTION
  XXIX. THE MARCH TO STIRLING
  XXX. THE GOOD SHIP HARRY
  XXXI. THE TORWOOD
  XXXII. THE DOUBLE BRIBE
  XXXIII. THE GREY HORSE
  XXXIV. THE BATTLE OF SAUCHIEBURN
  XXXV. THE FOUR HORSEMEN
  XXXVI. THE MILL ON THE BANNOCK
  XXXVII. THE REGICIDES
  XXXVIII. THE HOUSE OF THE BARTONS
  XXXIX. THE PRINCE AND THE ADMIRAL
  XL. CLEARED FOR ACTION
  XLI. THE ENGLISH BOAT
  XLII. THE LOVER AND THE SPY
  XLIII. THE BATTLE OF THE MAY
  XLIV. LARGO
  XLV. ST. ANTHONY'S BELL
  XLVI. THE GUNNER
  XLVII. BORTHWICK'S NEW MISSION
  XLVIII. TIB'S HOWFF
  XLIX. THE KING'S WARK
  L. THE SUMMER SPEAT
  LI. LADY EFFIE'S LETTER
  LII. THE HERMIT OF LORETTO
  LIII. THE TRYSTE AT LORETTO
  LIV. THE WEIRDWOMAN'S TREE
  LV. THE ESCAPE
  LVI. THE UNICORN LOOSE
  LVII. CAMBUSKENNETH
  LVIII. DOUBT, FEAR, AND SECRECY
  LIX. REUNITED
  LX. LONDON IN 1488
  LXI. THE ADMIRAL'S STORY--THE LEGEND OF CORA LYNN
  LXII. STORY CONTINUED--"ERIS-SKENE!"
  LXIII. THE BROKEN WEDDING-RING
  LXIV. THE BATTLE OFF FIFENESS
  LXV. THE ENGLISH PRISONERS
  LXVI. THE STANE BICKER
  LXVII. THE MAUCHLINE TOWER
  LXVIII. DUNBLANE
  LXIX. THE MIDNIGHT TRYSTE
  LXX. THE IRON BELT
  CONCLUSION
  NOTES




THE YELLOW FRIGATE

OR,

THE THREE SISTERS



CHAPTER I.

ON BOARD.

  "There was a ship at morning prime
    The Scottish shore forsook,
  And southward with a favouring gab
    Her rapid course she took:
  Her mast St. Andrew's banner bears,
    And heaven be now her speed!
  For with her goes the bravest knight
    That Scotland hath in need."
                          BALLADS AND LAYS.


By the fragment of a log-book, which was found among the MSS. just
referred to, we are informed that on Beltane day, in the year of
Grace 1488, two Scottish ships of war, the _Yellow Frigate_ and the
_Queen Margaret_, were lying becalmed off the mouth of the Tay, about
seven miles from the Gaa Sands, and three from the Inchcape Rock, the
large bell of which was heard at times, as its sonorous notes floated
over the still bosom of the water.  An abbot of St. Thomas at
Arbroath had hung it there, on a wooden frame, to indicate by night
that ghastly ridge, so long the terror of mariners; and thus as the
waves rose and fell, they swung it to and fro.  Water will convey
sound to a vast distance; thus, in the noon of a calm May day, the
notes of the Inchcape bell were distinctly heard on board of the two
ships of his Majesty James III., although they were three miles
distant from the reef.

A groundswell came off the dangerous sands of Abertay; the sails of
the caravels flapped lazily against the masts, as the hulls rolled
from side to side slowly and heavily, for there was so little wind
that neither would obey her helm, but lay like a log on this water.

The fertile shores of Fife and Angus were shrouded in hazy summer
mist, above which peeped the bare scalp of the Law of Dundee.  Noon
passed, and still the swell came rolling in long, glassy, and
monotonous ridges from the land, while the burnished sea seemed
smooth, as if coated over with oil.  The ships lay about half a mile
apart; and the _Yellow Frigate_, with which we have more particularly
to do, was nearest to the shore.

A young officer who was pacing to and fro on her poop, gazed
frequently and impatiently at the mouth of the river, and after
wearying himself by whistling for the lagging wind, tossing splinters
of lighted wood into the water, and watching anxiously the direction
taken by the puffs of smoke or steam, he suddenly slapped his hands.

"Ahoy there, mizen-top!  Barton," he exclaimed to an officer who had
ascended into the mizen-rigging, "there is a breeze setting in from
the east."

"Right, Falconer," replied the other; "I can see it curling the water
over the Inchcape; and it comes in time, for I was beginning to
bethink me of some other trade, for this of sailor requires overmuch
patience for me.  So-ho! here it comes!" he continued, while
descending the ratlins with the activity of a squirrel.  "See how the
sea wrinkles before it!"

"Now the canvas fills," said Falconer, looking aloft.

"The _Queen Margaret_ has caught it already, and now old Mathieson
squares his yards.  Aha! he is an active carle; always on the
look-out, and his messmates jump like crickets when his whistle
blows."

The person thus eulogized, we find to have been Sir Alexander
Mathieson, a rich merchant-skipper of Leith, who had become captain
of a king's ship, and won the name of "King of the Sea."

"Keep her away, timoneer," said Barton; "keep her away yet--a point
or two to the south."

"Why so," asked Falconer, "when she lies so well?"

"Because, in entering the harbour of Dundee, we must keep the north
gable of St. Clement's kirk upon the bar, and on the north-west,
right over against Broughty, else we shall run upon the Drummilaw
Sands; and then not St. Clement himself, nor his blessed anchor to
boot, would save us.  Master gunner--Willie Wad--please to inform Sir
Andrew that a breeze is springing up; but that I see nothing of my
father's ship, the _Unicorn_, at anchor in the Firth."

"Art thou sure?" said Falconer, anxiously.

"Sure!  I would know her by her red poop-lanterns and square rigging
among a thousand ships."

Robert Barton, who was captain of the ship, hastened to get sail made
on her; and as the breeze freshened, the yards were almost squared;
the notes of the Inchcape bell died away, and both vessels stood
slowly into that beautiful estuary formed by the confluence of the
Tay with the German Sea.

The sailors, who, during the calm, hud been lounging lazily on deck,
or basking in the sunshine between the brass guns, exchanged their
listlessness for activity; a smile of satisfaction spread over their
weather-beaten visages, and a hum of gladness arose from the ship.

"Now, timoneer, the breeze is more aft," cried Barton; "steer dead
for the harbour mouth."

"Soho!" said Falconer, "the _Margaret_ is coming up with us, hand
over hand."

"Fear not," replied Barton, joyously, "we shall soon leave her far
astern.  Thou knowest, Falconer, that this good caravel was built
under Sir Andrew's own eyes at the New Haven, near Leith," continued
the captain, surveying with a seaman's proverbial delight the lofty
rigging of the frigate.

"Yet, she is but a cockle-shell to the great ship of Hiero, anent
which, Father Zuill, the chaplain, told us so many wonderful things
after mass yesterday."

"If you had seen how beautifully she took the water, diving deep with
her stern, and tilting up her bow like a swan.  She is sharp as a
lance at the bows below the water line--bold above it; straight
between poop and forecastle--clean in the counter, and bolted with
copper.  By the faith of Barton, there sails not such another ship in
all Scottish waters; and I marvel mickle, if either French Francis,
or English Harry, will ever build one like her."

The ship which Captain Barton eulogised so highly would create no
small speculation in Bonny Dundee, if she and her consort were seen
standing before the wind, right up the Firth of Tay, in this year
1855; and we may imagine the criticisms of the rough old tars, who
usually congregate about the piers and rocks of Broughty Ferry.  Her
whole hull was painted _brilliant yellow_; hence the name, that has
won her a place so conspicuous in the histories of the period.

Both vessels seemed comparatively low in the waist, for their
gigantic poops and forecastles rose like wooden towers above the sea;
and to render this simile more complete, were furnished with little
wooden tourelles at the inner angles.  Elaborate carving and gorgeous
gilding covered the hulls above the water-line; and amid this,
grinned the great carthouns or forty-eight pounders; the brass
culverins and falconets, tier above tier.  The port-lids were painted
a flaming red; three gigantic lanterns, with tops of polished brass,
surmounted each of the poops, which had round their sterns and
quarters a gaudy row of painted shields, bearing the armorial blazons
of the gentlemen who served on board.  Round the butt of each mast
stood a rack of long Scottish spears and hand-guns, into the tubes of
which were inserted the hafts of Jedwood axes.

The _Yellow Caravel_ or frigate carried fifty guns; the _Margaret_,
twenty.  Both were ship rigged, with three masts, each of these being
composed of two long tapered spars, fidded at the tops, which were
clumsy and basket-like enclosures, surrounded by little embrasures,
from whence the cross-bowmen, pages, and arquebussiers, could gall
the enemy in security.  From the carved bows, the bowsprits started
up at an angle of forty-five degrees; and each had rigged thereon a
lesser or fourth mast, having a great square spritsail before.  At
the yard-_arms_ were iron hooks to grasp an enemy's rigging.  All the
sails were large and square.  At her mainmast head, each vessel
carried the flag of the admiral, a golden tree in a blue field; while
at the stern waved the blue national ensign, with the great white
cross of St. Andrew, extending from corner to corner.

The summer sun of this fair Beltane day shone joyously on the glassy
water, on the glittering hulls and snow-white canvas of these stately
caravels, as they neared those green headlands which form the
entrance to one of the noblest of the Scottish firths.

On the south the shore is bold and rocky; there, round its old peel,
now in ruins, clustered the little village of Port-on-Craig, whose
population lived by fishing and managing the boats of the ferry (the
oldest in the kingdom), which plied between Fife and the opposite
point, where, on a bare and unwooded promontory stands the Royal
Castle of Broughty, a strong, square tower, then surrounded by a
barbican and other defences, which frowned towards the ocean on the
east, defending the narrow strait from hostile fleets, and on the
west, towards a dreary salt-marsh, that stretched almost from the
outer walls to the gates of busy Dundee.

The dresses of the officers and crews of the ships of James III. were
as remarkable as the aspect of their craft; for Robert Barton, who
was sailing master or captain, and Sir David Falconer, who was
captain of the arquebussiers, wore doublets or pourpoints of grey
velvet, cut very short, with slit sleeves, to show the loose white
shirts below; their shoulders were padded out with _mahoitres_, or
large puffs; they wore tight hose of Flanders cloth, with long boots
that came up to their knees, They had swords and daggers of great
length and flat blue bonnets; at the end of his gold neckchain, the
sailor carried a whistle; but the soldier had a cross and medal; and,
as a protection from salt water, each wore an overall, or rough
surcoat of Galloway frieze, trimmed with brown fur.

The sailors wore gaberdines of the same coarse material, with fustian
breeches, blue bonnets, and shoes of undressed deerskin, which in
those days won us the strange appellation of _rough-footed Scots_.
Willie Wad, the gunner, and Archy of Anster, the boatswain, only,
wore doublets of Flemish cloth, edged with silver lace, and with the
royal crest, the crown and lion _sejant_, embroidered on the sleeves
thereof.  The arquebussiers, of whom there were a hundred and fifty
on board, wore steel casquetels, with large oval ear-plates, buff
coats, and broad military belts, which sustained their dirks,
priming-horns, bullet-bags, and the spanners of their long-barrelled
arquebusses.

Such was the general aspect of the ships and crews of his Majesty
James III.

Barton and Falconer were both stout and athletic young men, but were
somewhat different in aspect and bearing; for the former, who was a
son of the admiral, Sir Andrew Barton, or Barnton, of that Ilk in
Lothian, the wealthy Leith merchant, who had acquired a splendid
fortune, and purchased a fine estate, was a florid and jovial-looking
young seaman, with something of the Cavalier in his aspect; but
Falconer, who had no fortune but his sword, had been introduced to
the royal favour by the late Earl of Mar--the murdered favourite of
James III., who knighted the youth for his valour at the siege of
Dunbar in 1478, when but a stripling.  Thus, though a knight, and
captain of one of the king's bands, he was but the son of a poor
merchant-skipper of Borrowstoness; yet he was a handsome and a
stately youth; his eyes, hair, and complexion were dark, and his
sharply pointed mustachios stuck fiercely off on each side of his
mouth.

"A boat has shot off from Broughty," said he, shading his eyes with
his right hand; "and two stout fellows are pulling for the ship as if
their lives depended upon their speed."

"Keep to larboard of the _Margaret_," cried Barton to the timoneer;
"for she draws less water of course, and we require all the fairway
to ourselves.  Keep her away--see how the surf curls on the Gaa
Sands!"

At that moment, a door, which was studded with iron nails like that
of an old tower, opened in the after part of the poop, and the
sentinels saluted with their arquebusses as the admiral stepped on
deck, and first cast his eyes aloft and then ahead.

"Keep her full, Barton," said he, "keep her full.  So, the old Tay
now opens her arms to us! and now the spires of St. Clement and St.
Mary are in sight again.  Gadzooks, I can see the Rock of St.
Nicholas, and if I had thine eyes, Falconer, I might distinguish the
great house of Stobhall."

Falconer only twisted his mustachios, and smiled, but with a sombre
aspect.

"How, Sir Andrew," said Barton, "you think the eyes of a mariner----"

"Are but green glass when compared to those of a lover--yea I do,"
laughed the good old admiral, as he walked to the quarter, looked
over the side, and whistled to the freshening breeze; thus he failed
to observe the ill-concealed gesture of impatience that escaped Sir
David Falconer, and the bitter smile he exchanged with Barton.

Sir Andrew Wood of Largo, admiral of the fleet of James III.--the
Scottish Nelson of his time--was originally a wealthy merchant of
Leith, where in early life he was as well known in the Timber Holfe
as at Sluice and the Dam.  He had first been merely a
merchant-skipper, who fought his own way at sea, but he had done so
with such signal success, and had so frequently defeated the fleets
of Edward IV. of England, and of Alfonso, King of Portugal, and the
pirates of many nations, that he was knighted on his own deck by
James III., who never omitted an opportunity of distinguishing that
rising middle class which the feudal barons viewed with aversion and
contempt.  James further bestowed on him the noble barony of Largo,
in Fife, and he held it by the tenure that he should at all times be
ready to pilot and convey the king and queen to the famous shrine of
St. Adrian, on the Isle of May.  His Castle of Largo, a pile of great
size and strength, he built by the hands of several English, French,
and Portuguese pirates whom he had captured at sea, and whose hard
work he made the price of their liberty.

Thus he, who had commenced life as a poor sailor boy of Leith, found
himself, before his fiftieth year, a Scottish knight and baron of
Parliament; the founder of a noble family; the possessor of a stately
fortress, Laird of Largo, Easter-dron, and Newbyrne; with a coat of
arms, bearing two ships in full sail under an oak tree, in memory of
his defending the Castle of Dumbarton against an English fleet in
1481, and defeating another near the Bass a few years after--But we
anticipate.

Now, his caravels had just returned from Sluice, where he had been on
an embassy, concerning the quarrel then existing between Scotland and
the Flemings.

He was rather under than over the middle height, and somewhat stout
in body, with a round good-humoured face; his complexion was fair,
but burned to a dusky red by exposure for nearly forty years to the
sea air in many climates; his beard and mustachios were rather full,
and the former fringed his face all round, mingling with his
short-cut hair, which, though it had been dark in youth, was now
becoming grey and grizzled.

On his head was a cap of maintenance, adorned by a short red feather;
he wore a rich military belt, and a jazarine jacket of the fashion of
the late King James II.; a gorget of polished steel, having
escalloped edges, and a magnificent poniard, which he had received
from Bartolemeo Diaz, the famous Portuguese navigator, who discovered
the Cape of Good Hope.  Buff-coloured hosen encased his sturdy legs,
and he wore plain knee-boots of black leather, with high red heels.
The only indications of naval life about him were, his silver whistle
(in those days the invariable badge of rank on the ocean), with a
consecrated medal, bearing the image of Clement, the patron of
mariners; and more than these, that unmistakeable roll in his gait,
which is peculiar to all those brave and honest souls who live by
salt water.

"And so, Barton," said he, returning from the starboard quarter;
"there is no sign of thy father's ships in the Tay.  We expected to
have met them here."

"It is indeed most strange!" replied Captain Barton, giving a last
and anxious glance up the broad and shining river that opened now
before them; "but assuredly I can see no more ships in the Firth."

"Not even from the mast-head?"

"Nay, though I could see the river as far up as the Pows of Errol."

"Some service must have turned up in our absence, and while we
lingered at the Sluice," said Falconer.

"And if service was to be found," said the admiral, with honest
emphasis, "my brave auld messmate, Sir Andrew Barton, would be the
last man on the Scottish waters to keep his anchor down.  But, ho!
gadzooks, here is the captain of Broughty beginning to waste the
king's powder.  Archy of Anster, order a yeoman of the braces to
lower my pennon."

At that moment a puff of white smoke broke over the black ramparts of
Broughty, as the cannoneers saluted the admiral's well-known flag,
which was thrice lowered in reply to the compliment as the vessels
swept slowly past, and entered the broad bosom of that magnificent
river.

The tide was now beginning to ebb, and those dangerous shoals, known
as the Drummilaw Sands, were gradually appearing.

Under these heaps lie the wrecks of those Norwegian galleys which
were destroyed in a storm in the days of Duncan I., after his general
had defeated the soldiers of King Sueno in the Carse of Gowrie.
There they sank, and there the shifting sand rose like a bar at the
river mouth above their shattered hulk.




CHAPTER II.

THE SWASHBUCKLER.

  "Kind cousin Gilford, if thou lack'st good counsel
  At race, at cockpit, or at gaming table,
  Or any freak by which men cheat themselves
  As well of life as of the means to live,
  Call for assistance upon Philip Mure;
  But in all serious parley spare invoking him."
                                    AUCHINDRANE.


By this time, the boat which had shot off from the promontory on
which the fortress is situated, was alongside the _Yellow Frigate_,
which was moving slowly, almost imperceptibly, up the river, and was
now some hundred yards ahead of the _Margaret_, which was but a dull
sailer.  As the boat neared, the song chaunted by the two rowers was
heard on board.  It was a dull and monotonous chant, the constant
burden of which was,

  "Hey, the canty carles o' Dysart!
    Ho, the merry lads o' Buckhaven!
  Hey, the saucy limmers o' Largo!
    Ho, the bonnie lassies o' Leven!"


"'Tis the boat of Jamie Gair," said Barton; "the bravest fellow that
ever dipped a line in salt water; let a rope be hove to him from one
of the larboard ports."

This was immediately done; the boat (which was one of those strong
clinker-built fisher craft, which are peculiar to the Scottish
firths) sheered alongside; and the two fishermen who rowed it,
together with a gentleman, enveloped in a scarlet mantle, who had
been lounging in the stern, ascended to the maindeck, and from thence
the latter climbed by Jacob's ladder to the lofty poop, where the
admiral, his second in command, and the captain of the arquebussiers,
were surmising who the visitor might be.

"Pshaw!" said Sir Andrew, as they all retired aft; "'tis Sir Hew
Borthwick!"

"But we must not forget ourselves altogether," urged Robert Barton;
"the man is a visitor."

"True," said the admiral; "I forget."

"Welcome," said Falconer, as this visitor, not in the least daunted
by the coolness of his reception, approached them jauntily, with a
tall feather nodding in his bonnet, and an enormous sword trailing at
his heels; "welcome on board the _Yellow Frigate_."

"A dog's welcome to him," muttered Robert Barton, under his thick
mustachios; "for he is the falsest loon in all broad Scotland.  Dost
thou know, admiral, that 'tis said, this fellow, with two brother
villains in the English pay, betrayed Berwick to the King of England?"

The Admiral nodded a brief assent.

Borthwick's appearance was somewhat forbidding.  He was past forty
years of age, and had black, glossy, and fierce-looking eyes; a mouth
like an unhealed gash; ears set high on his head, black teeth, and a
stumpy beard.  He wore a faded doublet of figured satin with
_mahoitres_, that had once been cloth of gold; his feet were encased
in English boots of that absurd fashion then called duck-bill, as the
toes were like beaks, and five inches long.  A purse hung at his
girdle, and a chain encircled his neck; but rumour wickedly averred
that the former was frequently distended by pebbles, and that the
second was only brass.

When he removed his bonnet, the remains of a tonsure were visible;
for Sir Hew (the origin of whose knighthood was somewhat obscure) had
formerly been a prebend in the Cathedral of Dunblane, but forsaking
the cloister at a time when the ecclesiastical rule was considerably
relaxed, he had espoused the more congenial occupation of sharper,
bully, jockey, and swashbuckler.  Always obsequious to the rich and
noble, but supercilious to the poor and humble, or brutal whenever he
dared venture to be so he hovered like a vulture wherever the
ambulatory Court of James III. chanced to be residing.

"And now, that all ceremonious inquiries are over, may I ask,
_Master_ Borthwick, on what devil's errand thou hast boarded us?"
bluntly inquired Robert Barton, who, being less good-natured than the
bluff old admiral, was at no pains to conceal his scorn for the
swashbuckler.

The dislike was quite mutual; thus a malicious gleam lighted the eyes
of Borthwick, as he replied--

"I came on board to learn that which is of much importance to the
jovial gallants about Court; (nay, nay, Sir David Falconer, do not
laugh quite so loud if _you_ please!) whether our good friend the
admiral has been successful in his embassy to the Flemings; for since
the interdict of '66, when our vessels could no longer trade with the
ports of the Swyn, the Sluice, and the Dam, wine hath been so bad,
and so dear----"

"That you must e'en content your noble self with plain usquebaugh,"
interrupted the admiral, laughing outright at the idea of
communicating the result of his important mission to a pitiful fellow
like Borthwick.  "But canst thou tell me, sir, where are the ships of
mine old messmate, Sir Andrew Barton, and where is he?"

"The ships of Sir Andrew," replied the swashbuckler, slowly, and with
another malevolent glance at Robert Barton, "are anchored safely by
the walls of London Tower."

"And Barton----"

"Is at the bottom of the sea, I suppose."

"Borthwick!" exclaimed the admiral, in great wrath; "if thou hast
come on board to laugh at us, by Heaven's mercy, thou shalt find none
here, for I will rig thee by the earings to the spritsail yard."

"He dare not trifle with us," said Robert Barton, in a thick hoarse
voice, as his swarthy cheek grew pale; "be patient, Sir Andrew, and
let us hear what he has to say.  Hew Borthwick, thou art poor, and
lovest gold, like thy own life-blood.  I will give thee a hundred
crowns if thou speakest the truth; but I will poniard thee on this
deck, sirrah, if thou liest; so spin thy yarn, then, hand over hand;
be a man for once.  'Tis a son who asks for tidings and the safety of
his father."

"Quick!" added the testy admiral, stamping his foot; "for my arm is
somewhat longer than my patience, sir."

"Hearken," said Borthwick, with deliberation.  "On the very day you
sailed for Sluice, three months ago, the Provosts of Aberdeen and
Dundee appeared before the Parliament at Stirling (where the king was
biding) making doleful complaints anent the great loss their burghs
had suffered from the pirates of Portugal, who had seized many of
their ships and barbarously murdered the crews.  In five hours
thereafter, Sir Andrew Barton put to sea with the _Great Lion_, the
_Unicorn_ and _Little Jenny_.  He sailed towards the Tagus, and by a
herald's mouth demanded immediate justice from the Portuguese.
Alfonso V. delayed; then stout old Barton lost his temper, and after
firing a few shot at the castle of Lisbon, put to sea.  Falling in
with the identical ships which had committed the outrages complained
of by the two Provosts, he captured and sunk them, sending the heads
of their crews, daintily salted in beef barrels, to the King, at
Stirling.  Being somewhat soft-hearted, James, as you may believe,
was no way delighted by the present; but, Sir Andrew, after
cannonading every town on the coast of Portugal, as he passed it, and
after destroying every ship of that nation which he met on the high
seas, bore away for Scotland.  Alfonso complained to his good ally
the King of England; the latter made inquiries as to the most likely
route to be chosen by Sir Andrew Burton on his homeward voyage, and
despatched his high-admiral, the Lord Thomas Howard, and his brother
Edmund, with a strong fleet of the best ships London could produce,
to the Downs, as these Southerns call that part of the north sea----"

"I know, I know, off the south-east coast of England, on the Kentish
shore," said the admiral, stamping a foot impatiently; "go on,
man--go on!"

"After sweeping all the shores of Portugal, and after escaping a
frightful tempest, on Saint Swithin's day, he was descried by the
English fleet, breasting gallantly up the channel, with all sail
possible on the _Lion_, and the _Jenny_, too, which bowled on
alongside, like a little gadfly, all legs and arms, with sweeps out,
and every stitch of canvas set."

"Ay," said Robert Barton, "she was a noble little sloop, built under
my father's own eye, poor man!--Well."

"The English fleet came on in the form of a half-moon, each vessel
with a large white rod at her bowsprit, in sign of amity; but Sir
Andrew knew the Lord Howard of old; and undaunted by his array, came
on with his guns double-shotted, and all his ports open; but failing
to break through, he engaged the English admiral.  A desperate
conflict ensued, for the _Great Lion_ was hemmed in on every side,
and boarded at both stem and stern.  Through the joints of his
armour, Sir Andrew was shot by an arrow, when about to retreat by the
rigging into the main-top on his decks being taken; and just then, as
he was falling, a cannon shot swept both his legs away.  His brave
crew fought round him in a circle, and he continued to cheer and
encourage them, by blowing his whistle to the last, until they were
all slain, or taken and disarmed.  Edmund Howard, with three ships,
pursued the _Jenny_; dismasted her, and shot her sweeps away; then
she struck, and the survivors of both crews--only one hundred and
fifty poor seamen in all--were marched in chains through the streets
of London, as a spectacle to the exulting citizens.  They were then
flung, like felons, in the fortress which they name the Tower; but
after being instructed to implore their lives from the English king,
they were dismissed; and now, _Master_ Robert Barton, your father's
noble ships, the _Great Lion_ and the _Unicorn_, have the honour of
being esteemed the best in the navy of England, and display St.
George's red cross, where St. Andrew's blue ensign waved before."

"And what says our king to all this?" asked Barton, in a voice that
was rendered hoarse and tremulous by grief and passion.

"Ay," added the admiral, with a terrible frown; "what says King
James?"

"He despatched the Rothesay Herald to Windsor Castle, demanding
redress, and threatening war."

"And the Englishman answered--?"

"That the fate of pirates should not occasion disputes between
princes."

"_Pirates!_" exclaimed Robert Barton, whose rage at such an epithet
surmounted even his grief for his father's death.  Borthwick's
sinister eyes were brightened by a grim smile; but mutterings of
anger were heard among the officers and seamen, many of whom had
crowded round to hear the news from shore; and many a swarthy brow
was knit, and many a hard hand clenched: for old Andrew Barton, like
his compatriot and mess-mate, Andrew Wood, had long been the idol of
the Scottish mariners.  "_Pirates!_" reiterated Robert; "dared the
English king stigmatize by such a name a gallant merchant mariner,
who, by noble valour and honest industry, has won himself a fair
estate and spotless reputation--a knight, who received his spurs from
the hands of a queen--an admiral, second only to the Laird of Largo!"

"Second to none, my brave boy," said Sir Andrew Wood, clapping Barton
on the shoulder.  "Thy father was second to no man that sails upon
the sea; but he hath found a sailor's grave, so rest him God!  As for
pirates--Heaven will know best whether kings or those who live by
salt water are the most honest men.  Every dog hath his day; and just
now Lord Howard hath his; be patient, my boy, until our new ship, the
_Great Michael_, is off the stocks, and then we shall see whether the
Scottish or the English cross shall float highest above the water.
But tell me, Hew Borthwick, what hath been the result of all this;
for among these lubberly Flemings we learned no Scottish news."

"You all know, sir, of course," resumed the swashbuckler, assuming a
lofty and impertinent air of consequence, as he stuck his left hand
into the hilt of his sword, "that the king's eldest son, James Duke
of Rothesay, was at his birth betrothed to the Princess Cecilia of
England, daughter of the late King Edward IV.; that his brother, the
Duke of Albany, was to marry King Edward's fair young sister, the
Dowager Duchess of Burgundy; that our adorable Princess Margaret was
to marry the English Duke of Clarence; that every one was to be
married to some one else, except myself, who, in all these
illustrious alliances, had been strangely overlooked; when lo! the
brave Archibald, Earl of Angus, who is now Warden of the East and
Middle Marches, grew weary of all this traffic with England, and the
long truce to war.  To square accounts with Henry VII. for Barton's
loss, he marched ten thousand of his vassals across the Border, and
ravaged all Northumberland.  So thus, for the present, have all these
royal marriages ended--in fire and smoke--bloodshed and cold steel."

"So may they ever end when our kings look for alliances elsewhere
than on the Continent," said Sir David Falconer.

The admiral paced up and down the deck, in a bitter and thoughtful
mood, grieving for the loss of his oldest and earliest friend; one
hand he thrust into the breast of his jazarine jacket; the other
rested on the pommel of his poniard.

Relinquishing the ship to the care of others, Barton stood apart,
gazing dreamily upon the shining river, with his heart full of sad
and bitter thoughts, while involuntarily he clutched the mizen
rattlins.  His eyes were swimming; but he bit his bearded nether lip
till the blood came.  Suddenly he raised his eyes to a large mansion,
which was looming high above others, through the summer haze in which
Dundee was sleeping; and then a smile spread over his broad and
thoughtful brow.

At that moment a hand was laid upon his shoulder, he turned, and
encountered the ship's chaplain, Father Zuill, a Dominican.

"Relinquish these bitter thoughts, Barton," said he; "and come below
with me to my cabin.  There I will show thee an invention that will
avenge thy father more surely than all the cannon in Scotland--yea, a
burning-glass, that will consume a ship at the distance of a hundred
leagues."

"Right, Father Zuill," said the admiral, who did not hear, or
mistook, what the friar had said.  "God may listen to the prayers of
an honest sailor, when He turns a deaf ear to those of a king."

A few minutes after they had gone below, the friar reappeared and
ascended to the ship's waist, where Sir Hew Borthwick,
notwithstanding his knighthood, was comfortably regaling himself with
Archy of Anster and Wad the gunner, on salt beef and spiced ale at
the capstan-head.  Zuill placed a purse in his hands, and said,

"Here are the hundred crowns which Captain Barton promised thee."

"A hundred crowns!" stammered Borthwick; "'tis an enormous sum, good
father."  (And so it was in the time of James III.)

"But Barton hath a noble heart and a princely fortune," said the
chaplain, retiring hurriedly, for he had neither respect nor
admiration for an apostate priest like Borthwick.

"Ah me!" muttered the latter; "where shall I conceal this, and what
shall I do with it?  I never had such a sum before!  What a thing it
is, for a poor devil, who has not had even a black penny for ten
days, to find himself suddenly the king of a hundred crowns!  I'
faith!" he added, while concealing his prize, "'tis well that fiery
birkie Barton knoweth not by _whose_ information the Lord Howard knew
that the Scottish ships would pass the English Downs about Saint
Swithin's day."




CHAPTER III.

BONNY DUNDEE.

  "Yon is the Tay rolled down from Highland hills,
  That rests his waves, after so rude a race,
  In the fair plains of Gowrie--further westward
  Proud Stirling rises--yonder to the east,
  Dundee, the gift of God."
                                MACDUFF'S CROSS.


In that age of cold iron (for indeed we cannot call it a golden age),
when the potent and valiant knight, Sir James Scrimegeour, of Dudhope
and Glastre, Hereditary Bearer of the Royal Standard, was Constable
and Provost of the Scottish Geneva, the unexpected appearance of Sir
Andrew Wood's two stately caravels created no small commotion within
the burgh.  No sooner was notice given from the Castle of Broughty
that the Laird of Largo's ships had been seen off the Inchcape, and
were now standing up the Tay, than it spread from mouth to mouth, and
passed through the town like wildfire.

Though now the shapeless façade of many a huge linen factory, and the
tall outline of many a smoky chimney, overshadow the ground that was
covered by green fields and waving coppice in the days I write of,
"Bonny Dundee" still merits the name given it of old by the northern
clansmen--_Ail-lec_--the pleasant and the beautiful.

Spread along the sandy margin of one of our noblest rivers, and
nestling under the brow of a green and conical mountain, it was
without walls in the year 1488; but at each end had a strongly
embattled gate, which defended it on the east and west, while its
castle, of the eleventh century, which stood on an immense mass of
steep rock that overlooked the Tay, gave it additional strength, and
added a military character to the naval importance which the burgh
was acquiring by the shipping that usually crowded its harbour.  This
castle is now removed, and a broad street has been hewn through the
heart of the rock which it crowned.

Its quaint thoroughfares contained then many beautiful chapels,
convents, and monasteries; and the stately hotel of many a noble
family, with turrets and turnpike-stair, embattled porch, and
armorial bearings.  These towered above the timber-fronted and
arcaded houses of the Fluckergaitt, the Overgaitt, and other
venerable streets, whose appearance was more picturesque than their
names would import.  There our kings had a mansion named the
Whitehall, the vaults of which are yet remaining; as also had the
Lords Drummond, the Scrimegeours of Dudhope, the Barons of
Strathmartine, the powerful Earls of Angus, and the great Earl of
Crawford, who, for his valour at Blackness, in the recent struggle
between the king and nobility, had been created Duke of Montrose, and
Lord High Chamberlain of Scotland.  Many great barons of the Carse of
Gowrie also resided in Dundee, where Parliaments and Conventions have
been held; and which could then boast of the Mint of King Robert I.,
and the palace of St. Margaret, the Queen of Malcolm III.; but its
proudest objects were that broad river, which from the hills of
Strathfillan and Glendochart rolls its mighty current to the German
Sea; and its ample harbour, crowded by the high-pooped and
gaudily-painted ships of France and Norway, Sweden and Flanders.

On the afternoon of this bright Beltane day, the return of the great
naval hero from the shores of Flanders caused an unusual commotion
and satisfaction in Dundee.  The whole inhabitants were "on tiptoe,"
and a joyous murmur spread along the Mole when the well-known
caravels of Wood were seen to enter the river; for now, though the
admiral was a knight and baron of Parliament, who fought under the
king's pennon, he still dabbled a little in merchandise, which gave
him additional value in the estimation of the thrifty burgesses and
merchant traders of the town.  Thus, every ship in the harbour, from
the great argosie that traded with the Levant, down to those little
crayers or low-built smacks which are still peculiar to the Scottish
firths, hoisted her colours.  The bells in the vast tower of St. Mary
rang a merry peal; groups of old weather-beaten tars, wearing broad
blue bonnets, gaberdines of Galloway white, and enormous boots of
rough skin, assembled on the rock of St. Nicholas, and on the Mole,
which then lay to the westward thereof, to observe, and exercise
their nautical criticism on the aspect of the tall ships which,
before a gentle eastern breeze, were slowly coming abreast of the
town.  There are bluff old fellows of this kind--half man and half
fish--who, in all ages, have haunted the piers of seaport towns, and
are great, pugnacious, and, moreover obstinate authorities, in all
matters appertaining unto salt water.

Amid all the dense population so interested in the arrival of the
admiral, there were none who bent their eyes more eagerly on the
coming ships than five fair young girls who were seated on the
bartizan of a large mansion, which (after surviving nearly all its
baronial cotemporaries) still stands at the corner of Fish-street,
and the Flesher-row, which were then, as they are yet, the busiest
part of all Dundee, and contained some of the finest examples of old
Scottish street architecture.

This mansion is large and square, like a great bastel-house; and at
three of its corners has broad round towers, which are strong enough
to turn cannon balls.  The whole superstructure rests on an arcade
composed of finely-moulded elliptical arches, that spring from fluted
pilasters.*  Its arcade is partly sunk into the earth, and it is
further diminished of its original height by a slate roof sloping
down upon the walls, which of old were surmounted by a bartizan, from
whence a view could be obtained of the river to the south, and that
quaint old thoroughfare to the west, where, two hundred years before,
the schoolboy _William Wallace_, slew the son of Selby, the English
governor; but to the north the lofty mansions of the Nethergaitt shut
out the view.


* In 1808, two hundred silver coins of James VI. were found imbedded
in the wall of this fabric, which is now named King James's Custom
House, from the use to which it was last applied.


In the time of our history, this stately mansion, the stone panels of
which were covered by coats-of-arms bearing a Sleuth-hound and
shield, with three bars _wavy_, was the town residence of one of
Scotland's most powerful peers, John, Lord Drummond, of Stobhall and
that ilk, who was Baron of Concraig, Steward of Strathearn, Privy
Councillor, and had been Ambassador of James III. to England, three
years before, concerning the marriage of James, the young Duke of
Rothesay, to a princess of that kingdom; an embassy on which he
mysteriously failed.

The five fair girls who were watching the ships' approach on this
bright summer evening, were his daughters, now left entirely to their
own control; for Lord Drummond was with the king at Scone, and their
mother, Elizabeth Lindesay, of the princely House of Crawford, had
been dead three years, and lay entombed in Dunblane.

Euphemia was twenty years of age; her sisters, Sybilla and Margaret,
were respectively nineteen and eighteen; but Elizabeth and Beatrix
were little girls, and of them cotemporary history has recorded
little more than the names.

Lady Euphemia was a very handsome girl, with fine hazel eyes, and
glossy dark brown hair, which was entirely confined in one of those
cauls of gold net by which the Scottish ladies had gladly superseded
the fontanges of the preceding reign.  Over this floated a white
kerchief of the finest texture, edged with gold fringe.  Her nose was
straight; her well-defined eyebrows expressed decision; her
complexion was clear, but pale; her bust and figure were
unexceptionable, and the very elegant costume of the court of James
III.--an ermined jacquette of black velvet, with spangled skirtle and
yellow mantle, displayed them to the best advantage.  She wore
scarlet gloves from Perth, and shoes of crimson tissue.  Her whole
appearance was gaudy and brilliant; while her air was lofty and
reserved, for it was an age when pride of birth and station were
carried to an absurd extent; but in her beauty there was something
noble and majestic; and her dark hair imparted to her skin a pure and
transparent whiteness that was very striking, even in a land of fair
women.

Sybilla was just a second edition of Euphemia, but with a slight rose
tinge in her cheek, and a stature somewhat less.  Perhaps the most
charming of the three was Margaret, who was then barely eighteen, and
had soft blue eyes, a pure and delicate complexion, a profusion of
that beautiful and brightly-coloured hair for which our Scottish Mary
was so famous; and her face (though less regular than her elder
sisters) had the sweetest expression that ever Raffaelle conjured up
in the happiest moments of his artistic inspiration.  There was a
dash of thought or sadness (which you will) in Margaret's winning
smile that fascinated all, and she was the favourite of the proud and
ambitious old lord, her father.

Lizzie and Beatie were both fair-haired and happy little girls, who
inherited from their mother the blue eyes and dazzling complexions of
the Lindesays of Crawford.

The three elder ladies occupied tabourettes; their two younger
sisters alternately romped round the bartizan with a wiry otter
terrier, or nestled among the embroidered skirts of Euphemia and
Sybilla.

The rich attire of these five girls, the abundance of satin, velvet,
jewels, and embroidery which they had about them, betokened wealth;
while by their air, the carriage of their heads, the chastened
expression of their eyes, and above all by the beautiful form and
whiteness of their hands, any one might easily perceive their birth
was noble; yet their father (although the heir of a long line of
chieftains) was the first of his race who had worn a coronet.

"Oh, look at the caravels!" exclaimed little Lizzie to her sisters,
who had been doing little else for the last hour; "look, sister
Margaret," she continued, clapping her pretty hands, "see how one gay
flag runs up after another!  Dost thou see Captain Barton yet, sister
Euphemia?--or thou, Sir David Falconer, Sybilla?"

"How should we, if thou dost not?" asked Euphemia, with some asperity.

"Because you are older and bigger than me, and should of course see
farther."

"Hush, child," replied Lady Euphemia, who had frequently found little
Lizzie's powers of observation somewhat provoking; "but I _do_
think," she added, turning to Sybilla, "that I can distinguish
Falconer and Barton on the poop."

"At this distance!" said she, shading her fine hazel eyes by a small
white hand.

"Dost see a white feather waving there?"

"Euphemia, Falconer always wears a red feather in his casquetel,"
replied Lady Sybilla.

"We shall have good Father Zuill, the chaplain, visiting us ere
long," said little Sybilla, "to read us some of his wonderful stories
out of that great book, in which he writes down the miracles of St.
Clement, the mariner's patron."

Be it known, that though these charming girls could write, not one of
them ever read a book in her life; for the simple reason, that there
was not then a printed book in all the realm of Scotland, where the
noble art of printing was unknown till twenty-two years later--being
fourteen years after it was known in England.

Here little Lizzie, after terrifying her sisters by a large wasp,
which she thrust before them on her fan of feathers, threw it over
the bartizan.

"'Tis the first wasp I have seen this year," said Euphemia; "thou
shouldst have killed it, child, for that would have freed us from
foes till the end of December."

"Father Zuill told us not to believe in that superstition," said
Margaret, gently.

"Yet he believes in beads that cure blindness," said Sybilla.

"And burning-glasses that will consume a fleet at the horizon and
further," added Euphemia; "but lo you, now, the ships are about to
anchor!"

The sun was now in the westward, and a bright flood of light was
poured along the broad and beautiful river, the green banks of which
lay steeped in purple haze.  The _Yellow Frigate_ and her consort,
towering above all other craft in the harbour, were now abreast of
the mansion from whence the five daughters of the Steward of
Strathearn were observing them; and being distant only a bow-shot,
the words of command issued through the trumpet on board of both
could be distinctly heard.

There was a light wind, thus the vessels were under a press of
canvas, and formed, indeed, a noble sight, with their snow-white
sails shining above the mirror-like water, and their many-coloured
pennons streaming in the sunny air.  They elicited frequent bursts of
nautical rapture from the old Tritons who were clustered on the craig
of St. Nicholas, a sea-beaten rock, that took its name from a small
chapel dedicated to that saint, which crowned its summit.

"To your quarters, yeomen of the sheets and braces!" cried a clear
and distinct voice from the poop of the frigate.

"This is _his_ voice--that is the voice of Barton!" exclaimed
Euphemia, a glow of joy replacing the paleness of her fine face to
hear again the familiar accents of her lover--even in the hoarse
words of command.

A moment after the courses were hauled up, and the light breeze swept
through the rigging; boats were now putting off from the shore, and
the high gunnels (or _gun-walls_) of the caravels were crowded with
glad faces, and hurried but hearty recognitions of friends were
interchanged.  The seamen, clad in their grey gaberdines (each with
St. Andrew's cross sewn on the breast thereof), and their flat blue
bonnets, were seen swarming up the shrouds like bees, and displaying
themselves upon the sharply braced yards; and then, as if by the wave
of a wizard's wand, the great canvas sails disappeared, landsmen
scarcely knew how, as they were neatly and compactly handed and laid
in, revealing the taut black rigging and ponderous top-castles of the
frigate--nor was Sir Alexander Mathieson, in the _Queen Margaret_, an
instant behind the admiral in his manoeuvres.

"Stand by the anchor, lads!" shouted Barton, with a voice like a
trumpet.

"All clear--yare, yare, my hearts!" replied the boatswain, Archy
O'Anster from the forecastle, while as the frigate rounded her to,
great blue ensign flapped in the wind.

"Then let go!"

A rushing sound, as the thick rope cable swept through the
hawseholes, and a heavy plunge, as the ponderous iron anchor
disappeared into the calm flow of the river, announced that the
admiral's ship swung at her moorings in the harbour of Dundee, from
whence, four months before, she had sailed for the coast of Flanders,
as we have already mentioned, anent King James's dispute with the
merchants of the Sluice and Dam.

At that time no man was so popular in Scotland as Sir Andrew Wood,
unless we except Sir Andrew Barton; but now he was gone to his long
home, and the people looked to his old messmate to avenge him.  Three
loud cheers were given from the shore as the frigates came to anchor;
and from aloft and alow their crews responded, with the deep and
hearty shout that can only come from the throats of those who are
incessantly combating with the waves and winds.

"See, dear Lizzie," said Margaret, who, though usually silent and
languid, had partaken of the excitement and bustle caused by the
admiral's arrival, "a barge is leaving the side of the _Yellow
Frigate_."

"Oh, the bonny little barge!" exclaimed Beatrix, dancing about her,
and comparing the sixteen-oared boat to the towering caravel.

"Two gentlemen, clad in grey doublets, are in it."

"Margaret, 'tis Barton and Falconer--thou seest his red feather now,
Sybilla," said Euphemia, as she flushed again with pleasure.

"They will bring us pretty, pretty presents, will they not?" said the
younger girls, clapping their hands.

"Father Zuill promised you each a box of sweetmeats," said Margaret,
with one of her sad kind smiles.

"Captain Barton promised me a silver collar from Bruges," said little
Elizabeth.

"And David Falconer promised _me_ a carcanet of pearls, with a hood
and veil," added Beatrix, who was a year younger.

"Thou--child?" said Euphemia; "and what would _you_ do with a
carcanet, a hood and veil?"

"Wear them at mass, and in the Highgaitt, to be sure," retorted the
little dame, testily; "no one fell in love with you, sister Euphemia,
till you exchanged the coif for a hood and veil."

"Nor with Sybilla, either," added Beatrix, making common cause
against the elders; "and as for poor sister Margaret, no one has
loved her yet."

Lady Margaret grew ghastly pale, and turned away.  Sybilla, who did
not perceive this emotion, laughed; but Euphemia, who had now the
place of mother over them all, said gravely,

"You are overforward, imps.  Eight years hence it will be time enough
for Lizzie, and for you, Beatie, to think of lovers, and talk of
hoods and veils.  Marry come up! child, thou canst not spin yet!  But
see--Barton's boat hath reached the Rock of St. Nicholas."

"Alas!" said Margaret, sadly, "what evil tidings we have to give him
of his father's fate."

As the two friends sprang ashore, the old seamen who were clustered
by the chapel wall, all doffed their bonnets, and murmured a hearty
welcome.

The rock was the ancient landing-place, and lay to the westward of
the old harbour.  It was there that David, Crown Prince of Scotland,
landed on his return from the Crusades; and there, that two hundred
years after, the good Sir James Douglas embarked for Jerusalem, with
the heart of Robert Bruce; for "bonnie Dundee" is a place of many old
and many stirring memories.

"They are coming this way," said Sybilla, in a flutter; "we must
hasten to receive them."

"But, lo!--what scurvy companion do they bring with them?" added the
haughty Euphemia.

"Sir Hew Borthwick," said Lizzie, "who cheated our butler at dice,
and stole the gateward's bugle."

"_Sir!_--how can you thus pollute the title of knighthood?" asked the
eldest sister.

"But do not the people call him so?" said Margaret.

"He is a mansworn priest," continued Euphemia, "and I marvel that the
Lord Bishop of Dunblane permits him to be at liberty.  Was not Father
Arbuckle built up in the gable of Gilston kirk for the same
crime--abandoning his cloister?"

"Oh, frightful!" said the gentle Margaret, with a shudder; "'tis so
unlike _you_, dear Effie, to urge such an expiation; moreover, I do
not believe it."

"Not believe!" repeated Euphemia, as they all descended from the
bartizan by a turret stair; "has not our father told us that he saw
it done--yea, and guarded the kirk with the lances of the stewardry
for ten days; and there, in the wall, the bones of the friar, poor
man! are yet remaining.  But, hark! there are our visitors."

At that moment Sir David Falconer blew the copper horn which hung at
the tirling-pin of the house door.




CHAPTER IV.

THE SISTERS.

  "A sailor's life is a life of woe,
    He works now late, now early;
  Now up, now down, now to and fro,
    But then he takes it cheerly.
  And yet think not our fate is hard.
    Though storms at sea so treat us,
  For coming home, a sweet reward,
    With smiles our sweethearts greet us."
                                    T. DIBDIN.


In an apartment which had three large windows overlooking the river,
the ladies seated themselves in a group to await their visitors; and
two, at least, were flushed and palpitating, for they expected
acknowledged lovers.  The younger girls were all expectation too,
anticipating certain gifts or presents; Margaret, alone, was, as
usual, pale, calm, and quiet--even sad.

The lofty walls of the chamber were hung with pale brown leather,
stamped with rich golden figures; the ceiling was covered with
grotesque gilding, and upon every available place appeared the
sleuth-hound of the Drummonds, with their motto, _Gang warily_.  A
magnificent Dutch buffet, having bulbous shapen legs, and deep
recesses, stood at one end, and was surmounted by a large hound in
delft ware; a gift by which Barton, whose father brought it from
Flanders, first made an impression on the old lord's heart.  The
chairs were of oak, with crimson cushions; but the floor had no other
carpet than a matting of plaited straw.  There was a high stone
mantelpiece covered with carving; an iron grate, the enormous basket
of which (the season being summer) was filled with sea-shells, and on
each side was a sculptured niche or ambre, so common in old Scottish
houses of that age.

"Heaven be praised, our anchor hath again hold of Scottish ground!"
said Falconer, as a page conducted him and Barton up stairs.

"How so--thou art either more of a lover or less of a sailor than I,
David?"

"Nay, I am not less of a lover, but more of a soldier, perhaps,"
replied the arquebussier, "or more of a landlubber, if you will."

"Now then, little marmoset," said Barton, who perceived the page
listening, "heave ahead, if you please."

The captain of the caravel and his companion were attired just as we
have seen them on board, save that the latter had adopted an embossed
helmet, with a plume of feathers, a bright gorget, and long steel
gloves.  He looked very handsome, gay, and glittering; but honest
Barton, in whose heart the recent tidings he had received, sank deep,
looked grave and grim, though a sad smile spread over his brown and
weatherbeaten face, as he took both Lady Euphemia's hands in his, and
greeted all her sisters with warmth of heart, though perhaps with
less of formal courtesy than Falconer, who had served in the King's
Guard, and was one of those fine handsome fellows whom all women
unite in admiring; for he had a superb but native and inimitable air.
While his friend, inured to a life of hardship on the ocean, at a
time when the infancy of science trebled its dangers, was perhaps
less easy, he was not a whit less noble in manner or aspect; and the
name and wealth he inherited from his gallant father, the fighting
merchant-mariner of Leith, had gained him a place among those proud
barons, who, but for the valour by which old Andrew Barton won his
spurs, would heartily have despised the magnificent fortune and
estate acquired by his probity and care.

Poor Falconer was wont to say, that all _his_ father had left him
consisted of a rusty coat of mail, two old swords, and four or five
cordial hatreds, or feuds, to settle; all of which he had settled
honestly and manfully, twice over, on the street, or the highway,
wherever and whenever he chanced to meet with the creditors; and now
he owed no man either a blow or a bodle.

"Welcome, Robert Barton, my dream is read," said Euphemia, rising up
with a bright expression in her beautiful eyes.

"And what was thy dream, dearest Effie?" he asked in a soft voice.

"'Tis of an old saw, told me by Jamie Gair."

"The fisherman of Broughty--he boarded us as we passed the auld
craig--but what of his saw?"

  "'To dream of a ship sailing on the blue sea
  Is a sign of bright joy to thy kindred and thee;
  But to dream of a ship that lies bulged on the strand
  Is a sign that dark sorrow is almost at hand.'

"Now last night, Robert, I dreamt of thy yellow caravel sailing on
the sea (said I not so, Margaret?); and lo, thou art here!"

"And my friend Falconer, too?"

"He is, like thee, most welcome," said Lady Euphemia, offering her
pretty hand, which Falconer timidly raised to his lip, and then
approached Sybilla; but on receiving from her a significant glance,
full of prudence and love, he sighed, bowed and remained aloof; for
the passion of these two was as yet, secret, or merely a matter of
jest with some, and of speculation with others.

Falconer, brave to a fault, was poor, and had only his spurs and his
sword.  He knew this but too well, and Sybilla did not forget it.  He
had long concealed his passion; but she had soon divined it; and now
they treasured up a secret thought in the depth of their hearts, like
a dream that might never be realized; for Lord Drummond was
ambitious, and had many a time sworn, that at least "four of his
daughters should _die countesses_."  Thus Sybilla and Falconer had
found their best resort was patience or hope.

The eldest sister was a happy, rich, and beautiful _fiancée_; Sybilla
was a timid girl, loved by one who dared not avow his passion to her
family; and Lady Margaret was sad and melancholy, loved, the people
said, by many for her goodness and gentleness, but by none for her
beauty--save one, of whom more anon.  After the first compliments,
inquiries, and congratulations were over,

"Ah!  I had almost forgotten thee, little one," said Barton, kissing
the pretty Lizzie, whom he now observed hovering about him; "but here
is thy promised necklace."

"Oh, joy!" said the girl, skipping among her sisters, on receiving a
beautiful collar of Bruges silver, with a pendant of opals; "now I am
not less than my cousin Lady Egidia Crawford, who is so proud because
_her_ mother was created a duchess."

"By my faith, Barton!" said Falconer, "thou givest such magnificent
presents to Lady Lizzie, that to keep Beatie's favour, I shall be a
ruined dyvour."

"With all the rings and blessed medals these children have got, they
might open a trinket shop," said Sybilla.

"And hast thou nothing for me?" asked Beatie.

"I have the most beautiful veil that the nuns of Sluice could work;
but unfortunately, it is still on board the frigate.  To-morrow I
shall remember it better than I did in the hurry of to-day."

"To-morrow the king arrives," said Barton.

"Nay--we heard nothing of it," observed Sybilla.

"Sir Hew Borthwick, or the man so-called, informed us that the king
was coming hither from Stirling on the morrow with the young Duke of
Rothesay, and all the court."

Lady Margaret's colour heightened at this intelligence, and to
conceal her emotion, she hastened to say,

"If Borthwick said so, it must be true, for he is one who is never
far from those parasites and flatterers who crowd the court at
present."

"Moreover, he told us that certain ambassadors from France, who are
now at the constable's house in the Carse, would be presented soon
after."

"And on what mission have they come?" asked Sybilla.

"I know not; but our right honourable informant, the worthy
swashbuckler, hinted--and really this fellow often knows matters
which are far above his position--that they had come anent some royal
marriage, as the young prince's proposed alliance with the House of
England has been so fortunately broken off since my poor father's
battle in the English Channel."

Margaret trembled so excessively as Barton said this, that had the
four lovers been less occupied with each other than they were, and
had the children not been engaged with the silver collar, some of
them must have observed her singular emotion, which however
fortunately passed unnoticed.

Restrained by the presence of others, the conversation of Sybilla and
Falconer (who, had the world been his, would have given it for
liberty to press her to his breast) was confined to the merest
commonplace; but Robert Barton and Euphemia, who, by Lord Drummond
having consented that their marriage should take place in autumn,
were under very different circumstances, had retired somewhat apart.
She had passed her arm through his, and clasping her hands upon it,
was looking up fondly in his sunburned face, and was telling him in a
low and earnest voice of all she had learned concerning his father's
death off the English coast; how she had prayed for him, and had
masses said for his soul; and with an air, in which sternness,
bitterness, and tenderness were curiously mingled, the heir of Sir
Andrew Barton listened to her; for his thoughts hovered between the
bright eyes and soft accents of the fair girl by his side and the
carnage of that day's battle in the Kentish Downs, when he would have
given the best ten years of his life to have stood for an hour on his
father's deck.  In these thoughts, and in those of future vengeance,
he almost forgot that this untimely event (though it put him in
possession of a princely fortune, an estate in Lothian, and a mansion
like a baronial castle in Leith) would necessarily delay his marriage
with Lady Euphemia for many months to come.

"How happy thou art to be rich, Robert," said Falconer, as they
descended to the street, after lingering long and bidding the ladies
adieu.

"Wealth does not always bring happiness, David," replied the seaman;
"and just now I am miserable, when I reflect on how my brave old
father, and so many fine fellows, have been flung overboard, to feed
the hungry serpent of the sea."

"The ocean is wide," replied Sir David; "but thou mayst meet the Lord
Howard on it yet."

"And he is not the man to avoid me."

"I would give my right hand to be, like thee, Lord Drummond's
friend," said Falconer, bitterly, and still thinking of Sybilla.

"Without thy starboard fin, David, thou wouldst be of little use in
this world; and mayst yet be the Lord Drummond's friend without so
great a sacrifice; besides, I can foresee, that between intrigues,
mayhap invasion from abroad, and domestic rebellion, the loyal and
the good in Scotland will ere long require all their hands to keep
their heads on their shoulders."

"Dost thou think so?" asked the arquebussier, with kindling eyes.

"Yea--a child that knoweth neither how to pass a gasket or knot a
reef point, might see it."

And though no prophet, but only a blunt and plain-speaking seaman,
Robert Barton spoke of coming events with more foresight and
acuteness than he was perhaps aware of possessing.




CHAPTER V.

JAMES III.

"Who ever approached me, but for some private object, or with some
private passion to gratify?  Hatred, ambition, and cupidity form
round me a circle without issue, and as a victim is ever needed for
each violence--that victim is ever myself."--JOAN OF NAPLES.


Next day, the second of August, the sun rose above Dundee in the same
unclouded splendour, and again the green hills, the ancient burgh,
with its spires and castle, the bannered ships, and all the wide
panorama of the Tay, were mirrored in its clear and waveless depths.

Bells were tolling merrily in the tall spire of the great church,
then designated the Kirk of the Blessed Virgin Mary in the Fields, as
it stood without the portes of the burgh; and a wreath of those
sacred lilies which still form the armorial bearing of Dundee,
encircled the now mouldering statue of our Lady, which, with the
little infant Jesus in her arms, has survived the storms of seven
centuries and the rough hands of the Scottish Iconoclasts, and still
adorns the western gallery of that stupendous tower which overlooks
the "_Gift of God_."

Almost drowning the peals that jangled from the belfries of the Grey
Franciscans in the Howff, the Dominicans in the Friars Vennel, the
Mathurins, and the nuns of St. Clare, the great bell of St. Mary
(which was rent when too joyous a peal was rung for Prince Charles,
in 1745,) rolled a flood of iron sound above the town, and summoned
all the burgesses to meet a monarch whom the people loved, but whom
the nobles hated--James III.--who was now approaching by the road
from Perth.

Beyond the western porte, and all the streets that led thereto, this
road was crowded by the populace; and there might be seen the
merchants and burgesses, clad in plain broadcloth, with steel-hilted
poniards in their girdles.  By law, neither they nor their wives
could wear scarlet, silk, or furring, and the females of their
families were restricted to short curches with little hoods, after
the Flemish fashion; and the ladies of poor gentlemen, whose property
was under forty pounds, had to content them with the same.  There,
too, were officials of the church, doctors, and gentlemen, (having
two hundred marks per annum,) in cloaks of scarlet, laced and furred;
and labourers, who had exchanged their work-dresses of grey frieze
and Galloway white for the holiday attire of red and green.

From the eight stone gurgoyles of the market-cross, which, as usual
in Scotland, was surmounted by a tall octagonal column, bearing the
unicorn _sejant_, resting its forepaws on the imperial scutcheon,
wine was flowing, and a noisy contest waging among the young
_gamins_, seamen, and others, who struggled and thrust each other
aside, not always with good humour, to fill their quaighs, cups, and
luggies with the generous Rhenish and claret, which gushed forth
alternately from the mouths of the dragons and wyverns; but order was
stringently kept by the constable of Dundee, Sir James of Dudhope,
who had brought into the burgh five hundred of his troopers from the
Howe of Angus--all sturdy yeomen, who wore black iron casquetels,
with oreillets over the cheeks and spikes on the top, and were armed
with that deadly weapon the ghisarma, which had been but recently
introduced.

Escorted by a numerous retinue of well armed serving men, all of whom
had _the sleuthhound_ embroidered on the sleeves of their gaberdines,
and were accoutred with jacks and bonnets of steel, two-handed
swords, and wooden targets covered with threefold hide, the daughters
of Lord Drummond, with their aunt the Duchess of Montrose, the Lady
of Strathmartine, and many other noble dames from the Carse of
Gowrie, were grouped together on horseback, awaiting the king.
Robert Barton, Sir David Falconer, and other gentlemen, attended them
on foot, and held their bridles, having assigned their own horses to
the care of the pages, who carried their swords and helmets,--for a
page was at that time indispensable to every gentleman of pretensions.

Conspicuous amid all was the old Duchess of Montrose, a tall and
noble-looking matron, whose height on horseback, when her stupendous
coif was added, became almost startling; for, like old people
generally, "being behind her age," she still retained one of those
enormous head-dresses which our ladies had copied from the French,
and which had been introduced by Isabel of Bavaria, consort of
Charles VI., who had to enlarge all the doors in the Palace of
Vincennes after the arrival of his bride.

Nor must we forget that redoubtable Knight of the Post and Chevalier
d'Industrie, Sir Hew Borthwick, who loitered near, bowing and smiling
to people who knew him not, or knowing, who disdained him.  After
completely failing to attract the attention of Falconer or Barton, he
swaggered through the crowd, clinking a pair of enormous brass spurs,
and exhibiting a new scarlet cloak, which he had procured by the
recent replenishing of his exchequer; he tilted up the tail of this
by his long sword, pointed his mustachios, and from time to time
turned up his eyes complacently, to watch the nodding of an absurdly
long feather that drooped from his head-dress; and the latter being a
velvet hat, like that of an Englishman, the people murmured, and made
angry observations about it.

The undisguised aversion and fear with which the crowd made way for
him wherever he went, were a source of satisfaction to this barefaced
charlatan, of whom we shall hear more than enough perhaps, in time to
come.  He found ample occupation in observing the brilliant group
which surrounded Margaret Carmichael of Meadowflat, the Duchess of
Montrose, and in surveying the brilliant colours of those splendid
costumes which exhibited all the frippery extravagance and coxcombry
of the time of James III.  Gold and jewels flashed on everything,
from the ladies' fair fingers to the bridles of their palfreys; but
by far the greatest number of diamonds and pearls glittered on the
long stomachers and among the braided hair of Lord Drummond's three
beautiful daughters.

Finding himself bluntly repulsed by Captain Barton and the
arquebussier, Borthwick had actually the assurance to address the
admiral, who came through the archway on horseback, surrounded by his
barge's crew, who had no other weapons than their poniards and
boat-stretchers; but a determined and hardy-looking old bodyguard
they were, with swarthy visages, long grisly beards, and broad blue
bonnets.

"Your humble servant, Sir Andrew," said the impudent swashbuckler,
elbowing a passage through them; "I dare say the folks will marvel at
this--a knight like me on foot, and thou, a seaman, on horseback."

"And how came this to pass, Sir Hew?" asked the admiral, who, being
older, had, perhaps, more complaisance or less pride than Barton or
Falconer.

"My favourite horse was shod in the quick by a villanous smith, who
is now dreeing the reward of his carelessness in the jougs at the
burgh cross."

"I congratulate you on your good fortune," said the admiral,
endeavouring to pass; "by your scarlet cloak I perceive--"

"That I have now more per annum than the Apparel Act requires: so
far, right, Sir Andrew; but, alas! an ancestor of mine lost a noble
estate by one act of indiscretion."

"Ah!--How?"

"By eating an apple," replied Borthwick, with one of his hideous
grins; "but so thou art come hither among us courtiers, admiral, to
steer by the royal smiles."

"The sailor's best compass is his conscience, messmate, and by that I
steer," retorted Wood, as he gave a peculiar wink to his coxswain;
then the Knight of the Post was gently put aside by the barge's crew,
and the old admiral alighted on foot by the side of the Duchess of
Montrose.

Around this noble matron, who was then the second lady in the realm,
the conversation was very animated; and, notwithstanding the awful
exclusiveness with which the Scottish noblesse in those days chose to
hedge themselves about, it was evident that the venerable Wood, the
gallant Barton, and the handsome arquebussier, were three centres of
attraction.

Margaret Drummond, still sad, pale, and thoughtful, paid little
attention to the buzz and bustle around her; she gazed anxiously at
the vista of the road which stretched westward past the Convent of
St. Mary Magdalene and the Tower of Blackness; a page held her
bridle; but the horses of her sisters were each held by their lovers,
with whom they were conversing in low and earnest tones.  Falconer
spoke little, yet he was, perhaps, the happiest man in Dundee, for
now he was by the side of Sybilla, and could converse with her
untrammelled by the observation of others; and as the only matron who
could control her actions knew neither of his hopes, (or, as she
would have termed it, his presumption,) many little attentions were
unheeded or unseen.

A cloud of dust that rolled along the road announced the approach of
the King, and soon a troop of nearly a hundred and fifty mounted men
was seen approaching at a rapid trot.  This cavalcade was well
mounted on horses of a breed which, at that time, was famous, a baron
of Corstorphine having improved the high Lanarkshire horses by the
introduction of some sturdy Flemish mares; thus, for hacks and
chargers, these large animals were esteemed as superior to any of the
four distinct breeds of horses belonging to the country.  All their
steeds were brilliantly caparisoned with rich saddles, housings, and
bridles, covered with fringes and tassels of silk and gold
embroidery, gilded ornaments, and armorial bearings.

On approaching the west porte of Dundee, the king and his attendants
slackened their speed to a walk, but their horses continued tossing
their proud heads and flinging the white foam from side to side.  The
monarch was unaccompanied by his queen, Margaret of Denmark and
Norway, who had departed, with many of her ladies, on a pilgrimage to
the famous shrine of St. Duthac, in Ross, then esteemed a long and
arduous journey.

James III., a tall, handsome, and athletic man, was then in his
thirty-fourth year; his complexion was of that deep brown tint which
is not usual to the islanders of Britain, and his hair was black and
curly.  When in repose, his mouth expressed the utmost sweetness of
expression, but there were times when it curled with bitterness and
suppressed passion.  His beard was closely trimmed; his air was
soldierlike; his manner dignified, at one time cold and reserved, but
at others sad, even to despondency, for he was the most unhappy of
kings.

On this day he wore a doublet of rose-coloured satin, embroidered
with damask gold, cut and lined with rose-coloured sarcenet, and
fastened by twenty-four little gold buttons.  Over this he had a
riding surtout of green velvet, laced.  On his dark locks he wore a
black velvet bonnet, with an embroidered band, a St. Andrew's cross,
and white plume; he had long riding-boots with embroidered velvet
gambadoes and gold spurs.

James, the young Duke of Rothesay, then in his seventeenth year, also
tall, and a very handsome youth, inherited his father's dark eyes and
hair; his straight nose, with its fine nostril, and his mouth, which
was like a woman's, but over it a dark mustachio was sprouting.  The
dresses of the king, the prince, and all their suite, were nearly
alike in fashion, colours, and richness, unless we except the Lord
High Treasurer, Sir William Knollis, one of the most upright and
valiant men of the age, who, as Lord of St. John of Jerusalem, and
preceptor of the religious knights of Torphichen, wore the black
dress and eight-pointed cross of Rhodez.  Around this ill-fated king
were many who were his friends, but many more who were his most
bitter enemies, and whose loyalty or treason will all be revealed in
future chapters; to wit, Sir James Shaw of Sauchie, who had been made
governor of Stirling because his father had been slain by a cannon
shot at the siege of Dunbar; Evandale, the Lord High Chancellor; Sir
Patrick Gray of Kyneff; the Lord Drummond; his brother, Sir Walter,
who was Dean of Dunblane and Lord Clerk Register; the Duke of
Montrose, who was Master of the Household and Great Chamberlain of
Scotland; Lord Lindesay of the Byres, and Archibald, _the great Earl_
of Angus, a noble then in his thirtieth year--one whose fierce and
restless ambition, indomitable pride, and vast feudal power, made him
a terror to the good king on the one hand, and to the oppressed
people on the other.  Then, he was popularly known by the sobriquet
of Bell-the-Cat, from the quaint parable spoken by him at Lauder
Bridge in that memorable raid when he hanged every favourite of James
III.; for, in his eyes, Robert Cochrane, the eminent architect, was
but a stone-cutter; Sir William Rogers, who composed many fine airs,
but a fiddler; Leonard, the engineer, was but a smith; and
Torphichen, the fencing-master, a miserable fletcher--men who
disgraced James III. by the preference which he showed for them over
a proud, barbarous, and unlettered nobility, whom, like his father,
he resolved to spare no pains to curb and to humble.  Vain thought!

This Lord of Tantallon, who was Warden of the East and Middle
Marches, and a chieftain of the powerful House of Douglas,
overshadowed even the throne by his power; for the King of Scotland
was but a laird in comparison to the great military nobles.  Angus
was dark and swarthy as a Spaniard; his hair and beard were sable,
his eyes black and sparkling, with a keen, restless, and imperious
expression.  Like his father--that valiant earl, who with ten
thousand horse, covered the retreat of M. de Brissac and the French
troops from Alnwick in 1461--he constantly wore armour, and was now
riding beside the Earl of Erroll, Lord High Constable of the kingdom,
who had come with a few lances from the Carse of Gowrie, to escort
the sovereign to Dundee.

As this brilliant and illustrious cavalcade passed through the old
moss-grown and smoke-encrusted archway which then closed the end of
the principal street, a general uncovering of heads took place, and
loud and reiterated cheers greeted James, who was beloved by the
people, especially in the towns where there was now rising a wealthy
middle class, who had no sympathy with, and who owed no fealty to,
the great barons, but were rather at enmity with them.  He who
cheered most lustily, in forcing a passage through the gate with the
courtiers, was the soi-disant Sir Hew Borthwick, who endeavoured to
place himself as near to the king or prince as Lord Erroll's lances
would permit.

On passing Sir Patrick Gray, he exchanged a glance of intelligence.

"_To-night_," said he, in a whisper.

"_Where?_" asked the Knight of Kyneff,

"_On the beach near Broughty_," replied Borthwick.  And here the
crowd pressed between them.

The king, still young and handsome, doffed his bonnet to the tall
duchess and her fair companions, and the young heir of Scotland,
whose spirited horse curvetted past them, bowed again and again to
his saddle; and though he looked anxiously amid all that glittering
group for one beloved face, by some fatality he never observed it,
and caprioled through the archway by his father's side.

Margaret Drummond, the foremost of the group, and almost unconscious
of where she was, had watched the approaching party in silence with a
beating heart.  The shadow of her hood and veil concealed her pallor
and the sad and anxious expression of her fine blue eyes.  Amid those
hundred horsemen and more who swept up to the gate, she had soon
distinguished Rothesay, and held her very breath with joy as he
passed, but alas! without observing her; and her young heart sank as
he did so; for though none knew it, save one old priest and two other
persons, the crown prince of Scotland was her wedded
_husband_--wedded at the altar of St. Blane with all the solemnity of
the ancient faith--but in secret.

Barton and Falconer were now compelled to leave the ladies, and with
many other gentlemen sprang on horseback, to accompany the admiral,
who had now joined the royal cavalcade.

The king received the fine old man with unfeigned expressions of
affection and joy; for grief soon discovers true sympathy, and
misfortune readily discerns the difference between flattery and
devotion: thus James III. always felt stronger and more confident
when such men as Sir Andrew Wood, or Lindesay and Montrose were by
his side; but such nobles as Angus and Lord Drummond were his horror
and aversion.

"There are times, my faithful friend," said he to Wood, as their
train fell back a little on entering the narrow Nethergaitt, "when I
envy thee and thy honest hearts the free and happy life they lead
upon the open sea."

"Yet a sailor's life hath its troubles and its crosses too--witness
the fate of Barton, my gude auld messmate."

"Of that, and of thy Flemish mission, we will talk at another time,"
replied the king; "let us not mar the happiness I feel at seeing
thee, honest Wood, the dearest and most faithful of my people, by
allusions to such cold and bitter subjects."

"God and St. Andrew bless your majesty!" said the admiral, whose eyes
and heart overflowed as he spoke.  "I have never done aught more than
my duty to Scotland and my king, as man and boy, for forty years,
since first I trod a deck--a puir sailor laddie, in the _Peggie_ of
Pittenweem.  I would run my head into a cannon's mouth, if by doing
so I could serve your majesty; and that, I believe, is mair than half
of these gay galliards ahead and astern of us would do; natheless
their long pedigrees and their dainty doublets, with white lace
knuckle-dabbers at the wrists."

"Some day I shall go to sea with thee, Wood," said King James, with a
melancholy smile; "for, by the soul of Bruce!  I begin to tire of
this trade of kingcraft."

"I like the land as little as a fish; but should a day of foul
weather ever come, when your majesty is safer on salt water than on
Scottish earth," said the admiral, more than divining the secret
thoughts of the king; "remember, there is a ship's company of five
hundred good men and true, under the flag of the _Yellow Frigate_,
every man of whom hath a seaman's hand and a seaman's heart, solid as
a pump-bolt, and not like a perfumed and painted courtier's, hollow
as a leather bottle, or rotten like an old pumpsucker.  Gadzooks!  I
would like to see a few of these braw gallants drifting under
close-reefed topsails, with a wind blowing hard from the east, and
the craigs of Dunnottar on their lee!"

The king sighed, and allowed the reins of his horse to drop upon its
neck.

"Your majesty is troubled," resumed the honest seaman; "but if any of
these dogfish barons have been at their auld work, just let me ken,
and, by all the serpents in the sea! they shall feel the weight of my
two-handed sword, or I shall pipe away my barge's crew with their
boat-stretchers, and they will soon clear the causeway of every lord
and loon in Dundee."

The king laughed.

"Thou art indeed an honest heart," said he; for he found that they
could converse freely, as the incessant exclamations of the people,
as they pressed along the crowded streets, concealed their
conversation from such jealous listeners as Angus and Drummond.  "A
process so summary might destroy thee, admiral, and thy bargemen too.
But indeed, Sir Andrew, I am sick of this ferocious loyalty (if I may
so term it) by which the nobles encircle me like a wall of iron.
Though short, my life has been a long and dreary labyrinth of
intrigue and civil war, of crafty councils and infernal
suggestions--a struggle between a tyrannical feudal peerage and a
gallant people, who would, and by St. Giles's bones shall yet, be
free!  The nation has placed upon my brow a crown of gold; but the
nobles have engirt my heart by a band of burning steel!"

As the king spoke in this figurative language, he glanced about him
uneasily, almost timidly, and encountered the dark and stern visage
of Angus, and the proud, inquiring eyes of Drummond but they had not
heard him, or, having done so, did not comprehend.

"I speak figuratively, admiral," said he; "but do you understand me?"

"Perfectly, your majesty," stammered Wood, as with some perplexity he
rubbed his grizzly beard; "but come, come, Sir Hew," he added, on
perceiving that worthy close to them; "ware ship--give us sea-room
here, if it please ye."

At that moment the report of cannon on the river announced that the
_Yellow Frigate_ and her consort were firing salutes, as the king and
his train halted at the old palace of St. Margaret, where the Duke of
Montrose, as Master of the Royal Household, and the Constable of
Dundee, had already alighted, and were on foot to receive him.




CHAPTER VI.

THE PALACE OF ST. MARGARET.

  "The weird wan moonlight looketh down,
  And silvers the roofs of the silent town--
  Silvers the stones of the silent street,
  That ere while echoed to busy feet."


This venerable royal residence was situated at the head of a narrow
street opening off the great thoroughfare, then called St. Margaret's
Close, though by mistake the civic authorities have now given that
name to another alley in the Nethergaitt, where stood an ancient
chapel, dedicated to the Saxon Queen-Consort of Malcolm III., who had
her dowry lands in the adjacent Howe of Angus.

By her numerous virtues, the sister of Edgar Atheling was so endeared
to the Scottish people, that every spot connected with her presence
is still remembered; thus her name was long and indissolubly
connected with this little palace at Dundee.  It was a gloomy and
massive building, which stood within a court or cloister, and had
over the central door, and all the windows, deep and low-browed
arches, covered with a profusion of catsheads and grotesque
sculpture.  These arches sprang from short, round, and massive
pillars, having escalloped capitals and zigzag mouldings.  The deeply
recessed windows were all barred with iron, glazed with lozenged
panes, painted with coats of arms and brilliant devices, designed by
Robert Cochrane, the royal architect, an artist of great taste and
talent--one of the murdered favourites of the king, who in his
foolish generosity had created him general of artillery and Earl of
Mar.

It was in this palace that in the year 1209, Alan, Lord of Galloway
and Constable of Scotland, espoused Margaret, niece of King William
the Lion.

Soon after the entrance of James III. the bells ceased to toll, and
the ship guns ceased firing; the wine and ale still poured at
intervals from the stone spouts of the Cross; but the acclamations
died away in the Nethergaitt, and soon a stillness reigned around the
small but crowded residence of the king.  A stranger could not have
imagined that a monarch and a court were there--so ominous was the
silence in that grim old Scottish palace; for James mourned over the
caprices of his nobles and the insults he had endured from them,
during his nine months' captivity in the Castle of Edinburgh, from
which he was not released until Richard III. of England interfered in
his behalf, at the head of 30,000 men.  Young Rothesay mourned over
domestic troubles, and a secret marriage which he dared not yet avow;
while a crowd of cunning favourites on one hand, and of ambitious
nobles on the other, watched like lynxes for the turning of any scale
that would prove of advantage to themselves.

Discontent was apparent everywhere in and about the court of James
III.  It was visible in the face of the king, for the recent
slaughter of his courtiers by Angus and others, against whom he was
nursing secret plans of vengeance; it was visible in the stern eyes
of the noblesse, who, by a royal edict, had been desired to forbear
wearing swords within the royal precincts--an order which they
observed by arming themselves to the teeth, and doubling the number
of their mail-clad followers; it was visible in the faces of the
merchants, _anent_ the twenty-one years' quarrel with Flanders; and
in the faces of the people, because they saw a disastrous struggle
approaching between the feudal nobles and themselves--a struggle
which the field of battle alone would decide for their future good or
evil.

That evening the king gave a banquet to his false courtiers, ad to
Admiral Wood, to Barton, and Falconer.  Lord Drummond was grand
carver, Angus grand cupbearer, and the Laird of Kyneff grand sewer,
or _asseour_; but Rothesay stole at an early period from the table,
and reached his own apartments unperceived.  There be exchanged
dresses with his faithful Lord Lindesay of the Byres; and putting on
a mask, with a shirt of mail of the finest texture under his doublet,
issued by a private gate into the main street, just as the last
shadows of the mountain that overhangs Dundee were fading away upon
the river--or rather becoming blended with the general obscurity of
the summer gloaming.

The young prince wore a casquetel, and had his sword and dagger under
the scarlet cloak of Lord Lindesay, for whom he was mistaken by the
pages, yeomen, and archers, in the neighbourhood of the palace, as he
passed into the burgh.

"Oho, my merry masquer!" said Sir Hew Borthwick, who had been
loitering near the king's residence for the livelong day, in the hope
of finding some one to drink or play with him, or from whom to pick
up any stray intelligence concerning the admiral's embassy to
Flanders, and the errand of those envoys who were now at the house of
the Provost in the Howe.  "By the Holy Kirk!  I should know that
dainty red cloak; now, were those locks black instead of brown, and
had that casquetel a feather, and those boots silver spurs instead of
gold, I would say this gallant was my good friend Lord Lindesay of
the Byres, and _not_ the young Duke of Rothesay.  But to the proof!
On my honour, I'll follow him; and if he is bent on the errand I
suppose, this night may bring another thousand of King Henry's
English pounds to my purse."  Walking very quick after the young
prince, who was carefully keeping himself under the shadows of the
darkest and least frequented streets, the spy cried aloud,

"Soho! sir--I crave pardon; but can you tell me what's o'clock?"

Annoyed by this impertinent interruption, the prince paused and laid
a hand on his sword; but being anxious to avoid a brawl, turned and
walked on at a quicker pace.  Borthwick, who was now close at his
heels, came abreast of him just at the corner of Fish-street, which
was then quite dark and destitute of lamps.

"Sir--thou with the mask," continued Borthwick; "when I ask questions
I expect to receive replies.  Will you please to give me one?"

"_There_, blockhead!" retorted the prince, furiously, as he gave him
a blow with his clenched hand which levelled the intruder in the
kennel; and as it was dealt skilfully, right under the left ear, it
was a full minute before he recovered.

Then, from the muddy street, Borthwick rose with a heart full of rage
and vengeance.  His first thought was of his soiled cloak; his second
of something else.

"'Twas the prince's voice!" said he; "I was right!  Oho!--let me
watch, and watch well.  How fortunate! the more so as I keep tryst at
Broughty to-night."

After knocking this fellow down, Rothesay hurried along the street in
the twilight.

Borthwick saw him cross it near the great mansion of Lord Drummond,
which, with its dark façade and round towers, overshadowed the narrow
way.  There he disappeared under the arcades, but whether he was
lurking among them, or had been received into some secret door,
Borthwick could not discover; yet for more than an hour he lingered
there, watching to make sure that Rothesay had really entered the
house, which he dared not approach, lest a thrust from a sword,
unseen, might reward his impertinence, from behind one of the columns
on which the superstructure stood.

At last eleven tolled from the tower of St. Mary's Church, and
remembering his appointment (of which more anon), the swashbuckler
muffled his cloak about him, and set off at a rapid pace along the
eastern road, which by the margin of the river led towards the Castle
of Broughty, the lights of which could be seen twinkling on the low
flat promontory that approaches the mouth of the Firth of Tay.




CHAPTER VII.

MARGARET DRUMMOND.

      ----They gazed upon each other,
    With swimming looks of speechless tenderness,
  Which mixed all feelings, child, friend, lover, brother,
    All that the best can mingle and express,
  When two pure hearts are poured in one another,
    And love too much, and yet cannot love less!
                                              BYRON.


In a small round chamber, really "a secret bower," of her father's
house, Margaret Drummond was seated alone.  She was half kneeling and
half reclining in an old _prie-dieu_ of oak, for she had just
concluded her prayers; and a missal, bound in velvet and gold, with a
rosary of bright amber beads, lay in her lap.

In a large holder of carved wood and brass-work, two tall candles
lighted this apartment, which was hung all round with dark-red arras.
Here was a little bed, raised scarcely a foot from the ground,
canopied by a gilded cornice with plumes of feathers, with a small
niche over the pillows, and within it stood the prettiest Madonna
that ever came out of Italy, with a little font, which always
contained some holy water.

This was Margaret's little bower, and at times her sleeping-place.
As she lay half reclined in that old and grotesque _prie-dieu_, with
her soft sad features partly hidden amid her clustering hair, her
long lashes downcast, one white hand supporting her temples, and the
other drooping by her side, she would have made a beautiful picture.
She was still as death, as she listened for every passing sound; but
all was quiet in that vast mansion, whose inmates were now retired to
rest.  For more than an hour she had watched and listened, without
hearing anything, for the old walls of the house were several feet
thick, and, together with the wainscoting and tapestry, nearly
excluded all external sound, even by day.  At last she raised her
head and listened, while her fine eyes sparkled with animation.

St. Mary's bell struck ten.

"_Ten_--and he comes not yet!" said Margaret, rising, to sink again
with a sigh into the _prie-dieu_, but almost immediately a knock was
heard at the side of the apartment, and a soft voice sang the burden
of that beautiful old song--

  "Oh, are you sleeping, Maggie,
    My ain, my dear, my winsome Maggie!
  Unbar your door, for owre the muir
    The wind blaws cauld frae Aberdaggie."


An expression of joy spread over her features; her eyes sparkled
again; her cheek flushed, and springing from the _prie-dieu_, she
raised the red arras, opened a little door by withdrawing a bar of
oak, and stooping low the young Duke of Rothesay entered from a
secret staircase, to which he alone had access, and which
communicated with the lobby of the house and its arcades below.

"Tears?" said the handsome prince, taking her tenderly in his arms,
and kissing her on the lips and on the eyes.  "Dearest, why this
emotion?"

But Margaret only sobbed, drooped her head upon his breast, and wept.

"It was my happiness to see you; but you did not observe me to-day."

"See thee, dearest Maggie," said the prince, throwing aside his
casquetel and rich mantle; "I looked all amid the glittering crowd
that stood by the western gate for thee, and thee only; but,
whichever way I turned, could see nothing save the enormous fantange
of Madam the Duchess of Montrose.  I vow it looks like a kirk
steeple!  But now," added Rothesay, with a smile of inexpressible
tenderness, "thou forgettest, I have one other little mouth to kiss."

Margaret drew back the curtain of an alcove, and there, within a
little couch, canopied by rich hangings of rose-coloured velvet, lay
a pretty child of not more than eight months old, plump, fair, and
round, with its small face and cheeks, tinted like rose-leaves,
encircled by a lace cap.  Two hands were also visible, so small and
so very diminutive, that but for their dimples they might have passed
for those of a fairy.  The prince knelt down, and while his heart
rose to his lips, kissed gently the soft warm cheek of the sleeping
baby that in after years was to be Lady Gordon of Badenoch; and after
gently closing the curtain, again he pressed Margaret to his breast,
and seated her beside him.

"Life is so sweet!" said he, "when one has something to love, and is
beloved again; and you, my Maggie, are a diamond among women."

"And thou wilt never tire of thy poor little Margaret?"

"Tire of thee?" sighed the prince, smiling; "dear Maggie, since I
knew thee I have only begun to live--to know joy.  To me it seems
that we have but one heart, one soul, and that without thee I should
now have neither.  And thou hast confided to me thy life, thy love,
thy destiny, and this dear infant, the pledge of them all.  Oh,
Margaret, without thee, how dark would this world be to Rothesay?"

"And yet, prince, for one long month we have not met."

"Why call me _prince_?  Dear Margaret, here there is no prince."

"Nor princess!" she sighed.

"There _is_--for thou art Duchess of Rothesay, and shall yet be Queen
of Scotland--even as my ancestress, Annabella Drummond, was before
thee."

"Alas, but for our unfortunate consanguinity through her, we had not
been wedded in secret, or been driven thus to commit a mortal sin.  I
had not borne this poor child unknown, or carried under my bosom a
load of grief and shame."

"Shame," reiterated Rothesay, kissing away her tears.  "Ah, Margaret,
have you forgotten that night in the cathedral at Dunblane, when we
were so solemnly united, as Father Zuill and the cathedral registrars
shall yet bear testimony in Parliament.  Ere long the Bishop of
Dunblane will bring from Rome the dispensation that shall clear us
all, and then I shall _again_ espouse thee, Margaret, with such
splendour as Scotland has not seen since Mary of Gueldres stood by
the side of James II. at the altar of the Holy Cross."

"But till then, I must live in terror, and love in secret.  Oh,
prince, had I loved thee less--had I known or foreseen--but I most
not weary thee with unavailing reproaches, prince----"

"Prince again!  Now this is most unkind.  Dear Margaret, why call me
otherwise than James Stuart--am I not thine own James?"

"Thou art, indeed, and my beloved one!" said Margaret, laying her
beautiful head on the breast of her handsome lover, with one of her
sweetest and most confiding smiles; "but do pardon me, if I say, that
there are times when I look forward and tremble--look back and weep.
There is something to me so terrible in the renewal of the old strife
between the king and the nobles.  My father, the proudest among them,
is ever muttering deep threats of vengeance against the royal
favourites, and in the quarrel which I see too surely coming, if all
the pride and ferocity of the peers are unchained against the throne,
what may be the fate of thee, of this poor tender bud, and of myself?
Oh, James, think of the many who wish for the English alliance, and
who would brush me from their path like a gossamer web!"

"Thee!" exclaimed the prince, clutching his poniard; "not Angus
himself, even in the heart of his strongest fortresses, or amid his
twenty thousand vassals, dare harbour an evil thought against the
lady Rothesay loves.  Nay, nay, Maggie, thou art sorely in error."

"At a wave from the hand of Angus, all the troopers of the east and
middle marches are in their helmets; then think of the hatred of Shaw
and Hailes--the treachery of Kyneff--the mad ambition of them all!
They are brooding over revolt--one day it will come.  Would, dear
prince, that we had never met or rather, that I had never been!"

"Still regrets," said Rothesay, impatiently.

"Pardon me, dearest, if I weary thee--I do not regret, but I fear."

"What glamour hath possessed thee to-night, Margaret? for, by the
Black Rood, I never saw thee so full of dolorous thoughts."

"An evil omen, perhaps," said Margaret, with one of her faint smiles.
"This morning, when looking for the prayers prepared for those who
are in tribulation, I thrice opened my missal at the burial service
for the dead."

"And what then?"

"Madam my aunt, the Duchess of Montrose, told me, to-day, it was a
sure sign of coming evil."

"Your aunt the Duchess of Montrose is an--old fool!" said the prince,
bluntly.

"Strife is coming--I know it," continued Margaret, emphatically; "for
I have read it in the face of my father and the faces of his friends,
when Angus, the Lords Hailes and Home, and Shaw of Sauchie, are with
him.  I have heard it in their deep whispers, and seen it in their
dark and angry glances, when Lindesay or Montrose, Gray, Ruthven,
Grahame or Maxwell, Wood of Largo, Falconer, or Barton--any who are
the king's known friends--are mentioned."

"And what matters it to us if all these high-born brawlers cut each
other's throats?  The peers of Scotland are her curse, and in all
ages have been her betrayers, and will be so until the detested brood
are rooted out.  A few names less on the peerage roll will better
enable the grain to ripen in harvest, and the people to live in
peace.  My father, the king, has taught me this lesson, and I will
never forget it.  War will come--I know it; for if we do not fight
with England, we must fight among ourselves, just, as it were, to
keep our hands in practice.  But fear not for me, Margaret, and fear
less for our little babe, for I can protect both, and must do so; for
my soul is but a ray of thine--my life, the breath of thee.  My
castle of Rothesay is thy proper dwelling, and I will place young
Lindesay in it, with five hundred of his men-at-arms."

The young prince left nothing unsaid which he thought might soothe
Margaret's fears, and remove those dreary forebodings of coming evil
in which she had indulged, and by dwelling as long as possible on the
expected return of the Bishop of Dunblane from Rome, with the
dispensation of Innocent VIII., he completely restored her to
cheerfulness; for that venerable prelate was in their secret, and had
undertaken to remove the only obstacle that prevented the public or
_state_ espousal, which Father Zuill (who, being partly a seaman, and
not over-particular) had anticipated, by performing their marriage
ceremony in secret, and thus ending for ever all those deep intrigues
by which the three Kings of England, Edward II., Richard III., and,
lastly, Henry VII., had each in succession striven to have the Crown
Prince of Scotland wedded to a princess of their families.

Though thus espoused, Rothesay and Lady Margaret were still lovers,
for both were so young, that long and frequent absences, with the
secrecy they were compelled to observe, lest the politic king, on the
one hand, or the imperious Lord Drummond on the other, should
discover their union, all tended to increase, rather than to diminish
their tender regard.

The prince remained by her side until midnight had tolled, and their
conversation was all of themselves; for so it is ever with lovers,
who would cease to be so if they tired of their theme, which "is ever
charming, ever new."

Promising to return at the same hour on the second night following,
James kissed his beautiful princess and her infant daughter, wrapped
his scarlet mantle about him, and raising the arras, slipped down the
secret stair, the concealed door of which Lady Margaret immediately
secured.

"She hath spoken truly," muttered the prince, as he turned the buckle
of his belt behind him, brought the hilt of his sword round, and
looked cautiously up and down the dark, silent, and deserted street
for the interloper by whom he had been formerly followed.  "She hath,
indeed, spoken truly.  A strife approaches that will drench the land
in blood--a strife which even I cannot avert.  This secret marriage
may destroy us both.  Dear, dear Margaret!  Like my father, a
fatality pursues me, and those who could guide us both may be the
innocent cause of undoing us all."

He hurried along the narrow and quaint old street, and, favoured by
his disguise and the watch-word, passed the sentinels, and reached
the Palace of St. Margaret unknown and undiscovered.

The unfortunate relationship which rendered a papal dispensation
necessary in those days, was caused by Rothesay's descent from
Annabella Drummond, queen of Robert III., who was a daughter of
Margaret's great-great-grandsire, Sir John Drummond of that ilk.  In
her own time, this queen had been justly celebrated for her
loveliness; for, as Cambden says, "the women of the family of
Drummond, for charming beauty and complexion, are beyond all others."

Other writers amply corroborate this, and add, that three girls more
beautiful than Euphemia, Sybilla, and Margaret Drummond had never
graced the court of a Scottish king.




CHAPTER VIII.

THE FISHERMAN OF BROUGHTY.

  Oh weel may the boatie row,
    And better may she speed;
  And weel may the boatie row,
    That wins the bairns' bread.
  I cuist my net in Largo bay,
    And fishes I caught nine;
  There's three to fry, and three to broil,
    And three to bait the line.
                            _Scots Song._


A cheerful fire burned on the hearth of Jamie Gair, the fisherman of
Broughty-point, and it seemed to burn brighter as evening deepened on
the land and sea.  The cottage, which stood within a kail-yard, the
gate of which was a pair of whale jaw-bones, consisted of a butt and
a ben,--_i.e._, an outer and inner apartment,--the latter, serving as
a kitchen, had a floor of hard-beaten clay; the walls were lined with
wood, and in the rafters were a vast quantity of lumber, boat-gear,
oars, sails, fishing-creels, bladders, floats, and other apparatus
stowed away aloft.  Half of a cart-wheel felloe formed a fender (such
as we may yet see in Scottish cottages), but the fire of bog-fir was
blazing on the hearthstone, for iron grates were then an article of
splendour and luxury.  On the wooden shelf above the fireplace stood
a little image of St. Clement, the mariner's patron, with the anchor
of his martyrdom hung about his neck; and on the back of the door a
horseshoe was nailed, with a sprig of rowan-tree, the usual
precaution against witchcraft.  From a rafter an egg was suspended by
a rope-yarn.  This was the _babys-egg_, the first laid by a pullet,
the gift of its granny, and carefully preserved, as a source of good
fortune to it in after life.

By the bright red light of the fire (which shone through a little
window upon the waters of the ferry) Jamie Gair sat mending his nets,
and affixing various large brown bladders thereto.  A red night-cap
was placed jauntily on his round curly head; the sleeves of his blue
flannel-shirt were rolled up to the elbows, displaying his brawny
arms, and, where his thick beard and whiskers did not conceal it, his
face was browned to the hue of mahogany by exposure to the weather.

Mary, his wife, a buxom dame of six-and-twenty, wearing one of those
long-eared coifs, which are still worn by old women in the Lowlands,
and a short skirted jacket, was fondling their son and heir, a baby
about a year old, to which she was merrily _lilting_ in that manner
peculiar to the women of Scotland, when a song is hummed and half
sung, while a dish of stappit-haddie (_i.e._, a haddock stuffed with
oatmeal, onions, and pepper), broiled before the fire, for breakfast
next morning, as Jamie had to start early, and now sat late in the
preparation of his nets.

Jamie had not sailed that day to the fishing-ground for various
reasons.  He had passed a stray pig on the beach; and, moreover, he
had on a pair of new boots--both ominous of a bad day's fishing, and,
perhaps, of greater evil; so he had spent the noon and evening beside
his red-cheeked Mary at the cottage, mending and thoroughly repairing
his nets for the morrow; for he believed as implicitly in these
augurs of evil as in the mark of St. Peter's thumb on the haddock,
and in the wonderful story of the twenty-four beautiful mermaids who
swam round Inchkeith, and sought in vain to tempt Abbot William of
Holyrood, who dwelt there as a hermit, to trust himself afloat on
their tails, which, happily for himself, the Abbot politely declined
to do.  Mary was pleased that he was at home, for the night was
fitful, and dark masses of cloud crossed the face of the moon, which
rose slowly above the ness of Fife.  The wind swept in sudden gusts
down the ferry, and the surf hissed as it rolled on the outer beach;
for the sand was thickly strewn with enormous whin boulders, and was
not a pistol-shot from the cottage door.

Three strange ships had been visible in the offing all day, and, as
evening fell, Jamie had observed them stealthily creeping towards the
shore; and when the gloaming came on, the head-most vessel was
perhaps not three miles from the Gaa sands.  When Jamie had scanned
her last with his nautical eye he observed her laying off and on, but
without manifesting any intention of entering the harbour or
requiring a pilot, as she never fired a gun or showed her colours.
Not a vessel had passed the ferry that day; all was quiet in the
harbour of Dundee, for the old superstition about the ill-luck of
sailing on a Friday was still devoutly believed in.

The hour was now verging on midnight.  Jamie had mended the last hole
in his nets, and the pretty Mary looked very sleepy and coy.

"Hark, gudeman," said she, interrupting her lilting, "some one tirls
the door-pin."

At that moment a loud and reiterated knocking was heard, and the
door-latch was shaken violently.  Jamie relinquished the net for a
boat-stretcher, lest the visitor might be, as he muttered, "some
ground-shark or uncanny body," and angrily opened the door, saying,--

"Wha the deil's this, makin' sic a dirdum at my door, at this time o'
nicht?"

"Sir Hew Borthwick," replied that personage, with gruff hauteur; and
Jamie perceived that he and two companions were well muffled in
cloaks, beneath which he saw their long swords and spurs glittering.
The two gentlemen were masked.  "Thou knowest me, Jamie Gair, I
think?"

"Ay, Sir Hew," replied the fisherman, doffing his night-cap, while
something of a leer twinkled in his lively grey eyes; "I took ye on
board the _Yellow Frigate_ yestreen, for which--"

"I owe thee half a lion; here it is.  Now, art willing to earn
another honest penny?"

"Troth am I, sir," replied Jamie, throwing on his storm-jacket; "I've
my gudewife and a bonnie bairn to provide for.  In what can I serve
ye, sir?"

"Take us on board the vessel that is nearest the shore, and thou
shalt have an angel."

An angel was thirteen shillings Scots--but now Jamie paused.

"A Louis, then?  Plague on't! thou sailest nigh the wind, man!"

"Come, come, fellow," said one of the masked men, imperiously, "do
not trifle, for we have not time to chaffer with such carles as thee.
Besides, this place hath a devilish odour of tar, wet twine, and old
fish baskets----"

"Wow, sir, but you've a het tongue in your head, and a dainty nose on
your face.  But it's no the money that I tak tent o'," replied Jamie,
proudly.  "The craft that was close in shore, and hugging the land a'
day, never showed her ensign; but three times lowered her boat, and
three times hoisted it on board again.  Her forecastle guns are
levelled owre the gunnel, and not through portholes, wherefore I
opine she is English; so gentlemen, I crave your pardons, but I
likena the job."

"Jamie Gair," said one of the strangers, in a hoarse whisper, "'tis
on the King's service we are boune; here are six golden lions; art
satisfied?  If not, I would not be in thy tarry boots, fellow, for
all the Howe of Angus!"

This man's voice startled Jamie, for he now recognised Sir Patrick
Gray of Kyneff, captain of the adjacent Royal Castle of Broughty--one
with whom he, a poor fisherman, dared not trifle for a moment.

"I will do your bidding, fair sir; but my neighbour is away to the
fishing-ground, whilk o' ye can handle an oar?"

"I," said Borthwick.

"And I," added Gray of Kyneff; "so let us be off, for I have not a
moment to spare."

"Gudewife, thou wilt pardon us taking Jamie away for an hour or so;
and bethink thee, dame, how many braw gauds and new kirtles these
golden lions will buy."  And with these words Gray placed in Margo's
hand six of those large gold coins of James II., which bore on one
side a lion rampant, and on the reverse, the St. Andrew's cross.
Jamie put on one of those broad blue bonnets for the manufacture of
which Dundee was even then celebrated, and after kissing the sleeping
baby, said,--

"Now, Mary, let me kiss thee, lass, frae lug to lug."

"To spare time, I shall be glad to save thee that trouble, Gair,"
said Sir Patrick Gray.

"Mony thanks, my braw gentleman," retorted Jamie, twirling the
boat-stretcher in his brawny hand; "but there are some things I like
to do for myself, and _this_ is ane o' them.  Keep a cog fu' o' het
yill on the hearth for me, Mary, gin the time I return; and now,
sirs, let's awa."

As they stumbled along the beach to the rude stone pier, where
Jamie's clinker-built boat was moored to an iron ring,

"Dost see anything of those ships?" asked Sir Patrick Gray whom Jamie
was careful not to recognise.

"The headmost craft wasna a mile frae the Buddon-ness when the
gloaming fell," replied the fisherman, looking keenly to the
eastward; "the wind was off the land then, but it veered round a
point to the north.  Wow but the moon bodes a grand haul o' herrin'
off St. Monan's the morn!  I wish I had gane to the
fishing-ground----"

"And lost these six lions--eh?  But here is thy boat, grumbler," said
the third personage, who as yet had scarcely spoken; "now let us
shove off."

"If these are English ships, sir," said Jamie, as he assisted the
three to embark, and cast off the painter, "I marvel mickle at their
impudence in being off the Tay, while Sir Andrew Wood is at anchor in
the Firth."

"Marvel at nothing; but keep thy wind for cooling thy porridge, or
for better uses," retorted the haughty Gray, rolling himself up in
his mantle, and his companion did the same, while Borthwick and Jamie
shipped their oars, and turned the boat's prow to the sea.

When the shadows of the land and the square dark keep of Broughty,
with its broad barbican and flanking towers were left behind, the
night (even while the moon was enveloped in clouds) was not so murky
that objects could not be distinguished; yet the three voyagers
looked in vain for a vestige of the ship which they expected to be
nearest the shore.  A pale stripe of white light edged the horizon,
and between it and the boat the waves were rising and falling, like
those of an inky ocean; and in that streak of sky, and between the
flying clouds, a few red, fiery stars were seen to sparkle at
intervals.  Cold currents of air swept over the estuary, bringing
that peculiar fragrance which a night breeze always bears off the
land; and the hoarse roar of the heavy surf, as it bellowed on the
rocks of Broughty Castle, and rolled far inland upon the shingly
beach to the eastward of it, could be hoard distinctly, as the boat
of Gair was pulled directly out to sea.

"Tarry a moment, Gair," said Sir Patrick Gray; "now where are those
vessels--eh?"

"You'll see them, sir, when they are lifted into the streak o' light;
there they are! awa' doon to windward."

"But what the devil is windward--which way?" asked Borthwick.

"Well mayst thou ask that, for it seems to be whichever way I turn my
face; but oho! I see them now!" added Gray--as the dark outlines of
two vessels, with all their sails set, appeared in the distant
offing, between the black vapours that seemed to rest on their
mast-heads and the darker ocean on which they floated.  "'Sdeath!
they are ten good miles off."

"Outside the Inchcape, at least, I should say," added his hitherto
silent friend.

"But where is the _Harry_--this devilish craft, which Gair says was
visible near the Buddon-ness?"

"I'll soon find out."

"What was the signal agreed upon?" whispered Gray.

"_This_," replied the other, discharging a hand-gun the air,

Almost immediately afterwards, two sparks appeared about half-a-mile
off; they brightened fast, and then two pale blue lights were seen
burning close to the edge of the water.

"'Tis the _Harry_!  Give way, Jamie--give way, Borthwick!" said Sir
Patrick.  The oars dipped into the water, and the sharp-prowed boat
shot over the waves towards the lights, which soon faded away and
expired.  The night was now intensely dark, for not a vestige of moon
was visible; but soon a noise was heard above the incessant dashing
of the sea.  It was like the flapping of a sail; and then one faint
blink of moonlight, as it broke through an opening in the clouds,
showed, close by, a large and high-pooped vessel coming suddenly to
the wind, as if the watch had descried the boat upon the water; and
this proved to be the case, for almost immediately, a voice in
English cried out,

"Boat, a-hoy!"

Gray, who answered the hail, and held the tiller, passed the fisher
boat under the towering stern of the English ship, and sheering
sharply round on her larboard side, the little craft was soon made
fast; but Jamie was commanded to remain in her, while Sir Patrick
Gray, Borthwick, and the third personage, who proved to be no other
than Sir James Shaw of Sauchie, governor of Stirling, were introduced
to the state-cabin, where, with some reluctance, we are compelled to
accompany them.




CHAPTER IX.

THE BANE OF SCOTLAND.

  "By Chericul's dark wandering streams.
    Where cane-tufts shadow all the wild;
  Sweet visions haunt my waking dreams
    Of Scotland, loved while still a child;
  Of castled rocks stupendous piled,
    By Esk or Eden's classic wave,
  When loves of youth and friendship smiled,
    Uncursed by thee, vile yellow slave!"
                                  LEYDEN: _The Gold Coin_


For many hundred years a curse, or rather a fell spirit, hovered over
Scotland, and time seems never to have lessened its force, or the
evil produced by the blighting breath of that _yellow slave_, of
which he who found a grave so far from her shore--poor Leyden, one of
the sweetest of our bards--has sung, in his beautiful Ode to an
Indian coin of gold.  This curse has been the mal-influence of a
party within the Scottish nation, whose interests were separated from
its common weal, who throve on its ruin and disgrace, and have ever
been the ready instruments of oppression, neglect, and misrule: I
mean that party distinguished in the darkest pages of our annals as
_the English fiction_--usually a band of paid traitors, whom even the
Union could not abolish; men who surrendered themselves to work out
the evil, disastrous, and insidious projects of the sister kingdom,
for the purpose of weakening the power of the Scottish people; and
thus, as Schiller says, "never has civil war embroiled the cities of
Scotland, that an Englishman has not applied a brand to the walls."

To the patricidal efforts of this faction, which for many hundred
years proved the bane of Scotland, our historians lay the blame of
every dark and disastrous transaction that blackens the page of
Scottish history.

Their intrigues brought on the troubles of Alexander III.; the
betrayal of Wallace; and that long war, which even Bannockburn did
not end; the early misfortunes of James I. and those of James III.,
when England intrigued with Albany to gain the town of Berwick, and
marry a prince of Scotland to Margaret Tudor.  We recognise the same
corrupt faction in those ignoble peers who pledged themselves to the
English king after the fight at Solway Moss, and thus broke the heart
of James V., the most splendid of our monarchs; who plunged Scotland
in bloodshed under the Regents Murray, Mar, and Morton; who betrayed
Kirkaldy of Grange, and, after a life of woe, surrendered their
sovereign to the axe of an English executioner.  Again we recognise
them, when "the master fiend, Argyle," and his compatriots, betrayed
her misguided grandson to Cromwell, and when their more sordid
successors sold their country at the Union; when they betrayed our
Darien colonists to the Spanish allies of England, and the Macdonalds
of Glencoe to the barbarous assassins of William of Orange.

Sir James Shaw of Sauchie, Sir Patrick Gray of Kyneff, and the
despicable swashbuckler, Borthwick, in the days of James III.,
represented the ignoble Scots of 1488.  They were conducted by a page
to the great cabin of the English frigate, in which several
gentlemen, all richly dressed, were lounging on the cushioned
lockers, and drinking Canary and Rochelle wine out of silver-mounted
horns.  A lamp, having a globe of pink-coloured glass, swung from a
beam, and diffused a warm light around the cabin, which was all
wainscoted, and hung with armour and weapons of various kinds.

On the entrance of the three visitors, all the English officers
withdrew, save Edmund Howard, the captain, who wore a scarlet cassock
coat, richly furred with miniver, and a diamond sword-belt; and his
secretary, Master Quentin Kraft, a London attorney, who was attired
in plain blue broadcloth, trimmed with black tape, and who
immediately produced writing materials, clean drinking horns, and
more wine.

"Welcome on board the royal ship, _Harry!_" said Edmund Howard,
bowing, without rising, while a sneer of ill-disguised contempt
curled his handsome mouth, over which hung a dark mustachio; for,
like a noble cavalier and honest mariner, he had an unmitigated
aversion to the duty on which King Henry had sent him, and for the
three Scotsmen, with whom he had to conduct a court intrigue.  "I am
glad you have come off at last; but why all rigged in armour--aloft
and alow, from head to heel, eh?"

"In Scotland, men go not abroad without their harness," replied the
Laird of Sauchie, haughtily.

"By St. George," said Howard, "four hours ago I was sick of knocking
about in the offing, and then having to creep in, like a thief in the
nightfall, between the Inchcape Rock and yonder devilish sands.  A
fine business 'twould have been to have found myself beached in the
shoal water, and just after this hot affair of ours with Sir Andrew
Barton in the Channel.  Be seated, Sir James; Sir Patrick, the Canary
stands with _you_; come to anchor, Master Borthwick--cannot you find
a seat?  By the bye, talking of Barton, I owe thee a hundred crowns,
Borthwick.  Kraft, hand this gentleman a hundred crowns, and be sure
to get his quittance for them, ere they are stowed away."

While this transaction passed, and the price of Barton's blood was
being paid to Borthwick, the two rebellious barons divested
themselves of their ample cloaks and masks, and each presented an
athletic figure, completely cased in iron, save the head, and armed
with daggers and long swords of a famous kind, then made and tempered
at Banff.

Shaw of Sauchie was older, less bloated, and less dissipated in
aspect than Gray; but he had the same cunning eyes, large mustachios,
and bullying or imperious aspect.

"Now, then, Captain Howard, let us to business," said he, filling his
wine-horn.

"Ay, to business," added Borthwick, filling his, and imitating the
nonchalance of the baron.

"Well," said Howard, "how does his Grace of Rothesay's amour proceed
(for of _that_ we have heard at the English court), and what chance
is there of his ranging up amicably alongside of a fair English
princess, yard-arm and yard-arm, with Cupid ahead?"

"Very little, I fear, since this affair with Barton."

"Barton was a brave seaman, and man of honour," said the Englishman;
"but," he added, contemptuously, "I have just paid for that piece of
sport."

"You have paid King Henry's spy," retorted Sir James Shaw, warmly;
"but remember that King James, and more than he, old Andrew Wood, and
Barton's eldest son, will amply avenge your battle in the Channel,
unless we have them both fettered, or disposed of otherwise."

"Then dispose of them, in God's name, and as many more angry Scots as
are in the same unruly mood; for King Henry wishes no more of this
work; and indeed, ere long, an ambassador will leave London, to clear
up the story of our conflict with the ships of Barton, against which,
I think, _we_ may fairly set off Lord Angus's invasion of
Northumberland."

"Well, but what is King Henry's new proposal?"

"Simply this, Sir Patrick; that by force or fraud we must either
bring off the young prince and have him wedded to the Princess
Margaret Tudor, in terms of their betrothal, or we must kidnap the
young Dame Margaret Drummond, whichever your most worshipful
knighthoods think can be most easily accomplished, for we have
undoubted proofs that Rothesay loves her."

"Ah!--is it so?" said Gray, with a dark frown; "but what does Henry
VII. propose to do with her? for I would not have evil done to the
maiden."

"He would shut her up in some remote Welsh castle, or perhaps the Red
Tower of the Dudleys near Wem, where she would never be heard of
again.  Like a wise old fellow, King Henry knows well that love is
fed by the society of lovers; but that, in absence or separation, the
fire goes out, and the passion dies.  Thus, if we could spirit this
dainty dame on board the _Harry_----"

"Easier said than done.  I have reason to believe," said Borthwick,
"that the young prince loves her better than life, and would never
survive her loss."

"I have heard it said that thy mother was a witch, Borthwick," said
Gray, tauntingly; "I would we had the old dame's aid to-night."

Borthwick darted secretly at the speaker one of his sinister and
ferocious glances, for this taunt stung him deeply.

"The prince is only seventeen--a chit, a child--and may yet love
twenty better than little Margaret Drummond," said Sir James Shaw;
"but to engage in a plan so desperate, I would require King Henry's
written assurance of a safe sanctuary in England, for myself and
friends, in case this plot were blown and we obliged to fly;
moreover, I would require another written assurance that, if all
succeeded--that is, if Lady Margaret _disappears_, and Rothesay
marries your Margaret Tudor----"

"Princess," suggested Howard, stroking his mustachio.

"Well--well--your Princess Margaret--that Henry will use all his
influence with Rothesay and the king to have my lands of Sauchie, in
the shire of Stirling, created into an earldom, together with a gift
of two of the best baronies now possessed by the Duke of Montrose,
supposing that by the same happy intrigue the said dukedom is
abolished, Angus made Lord Chancellor, and the Lindesays driven to
Flanders or the devil!"

"Um--um--Flanders, or the devil," muttered Master Quentin Kraft,
writing very literally and very fast.

"And I," said Sir Patrick Gray, "require the same royal assurances,
with Henry's recommendation to have my barony of Kyneff and estate of
Caterline created into a lordship, with the captainrie of Broughty to
me and my heirs, heritably and irredeemably, and the salmons' cruives
of the Dichty, now pertaining to the Laird of Grange, who must fish
for his salmon elsewhere."

"In all these particulars, if Henry's interest fail not, you shall be
perfectly satisfied.  Write carefully, Master Kraft."

"And I--" began Borthwick.

"Shall have two hundred crowns yearly, to be paid by the English
ambassador.  Ah! your eyes open like port-holes at that."

"But suppose there is no ambassador, which happens very often,
Captain Howard?"

"Ah! to be sure; then the Governor of Berwick shall pay thee."

"But how are we to have this pretty maiden brought on board an
English ship?" asked Howard.

"'Tis the most difficult matter of all.  A dose of poison might serve
us better, and obtain our ends without much trouble," suggested
Borthwick.

The ruffian barons eyed each other, but did not speak.

"Nay, nay," said the gallant Howard; "by Heaven, fellow, if thou
makest another suggestion such as that, I will order the boatswain's
mates to fling thee overboard in a hencoop!  In the king's service I
have usually carried more sail than ballast--but poison! a sailor's
curse on't!  Egad, 'tis a word never mentioned to a Howard, and
moreover," he added, with a furious glance, as he rose from the
table, "'twas a villain's thought in thee!"

"Softly," said Sir Patrick Gray, with alarm; "let us not quarrel,
Captain Howard, about poison or abduction; none of us are severe
moralists--"

"Scot--you speak for yourself, I presume."

"I would rather marry the damsel myself than that we should have high
words anent the disposal of her.  Bethink thee, Englishman--'tis as
much as your life is worth to be this night within gunshot of the
Scottish shore; and this gentleman----"

"What--Borthwick?"

"Yes, he----"

"Might inform Sir Andrew Wood, you mean to say," continued Howard.
"Well, I should like to see your admiral's _Yellow Frigate_ come out
of the river, with all her iron teeth bristling; for now that Barton
is gone, he is the best and bravest seaman that treads upon a deck.
Nay, nay, none of you will betray me, unless King James pays better
than King Henry."

Gray and Sauchie were stung by this bold remark, and the former
hastened to say--

"How know we not but the prince may have wedded the Lady Margaret
Drummond?"

"Pshaw! what would it matter if he had?  She is only the daughter of
a subject--a baron."

"Captain Howard, you talk like an Englishman, who knows not the
temper of our Scottish barons.  Her father can rouse all Strathearn,
and set Scotland on fire.  Beware lest the flames roll over the
Border."

"Master Borthwick, you did not inform me that the Lord Drummond was
so powerful, or this amour so dangerous."

"If King Henry had written to me----"

Here the Englishman burst into a loud fit of laughter.

"King Henry write to thee!  By Jove, I like this impudence--it amuses
me excessively!"

"So it seems," growled Borthwick, every glance of whose sinister eyes
indicated the restless and evil soul within.

"Bah! people don't write that which is more safe when borne by word
of mouth.  Henry might hang me, or the King of Scots might hang us
all, for letting our gaff too loose--our words would die with us; but
letters will endure while ink and paper last.  Yet where is our _bond
in cipher_, of which King Henry has the key--we cannot do without
that.  Master Kraft, is it ready?"

"Here it is, sir," replied the little secretary, laying a piece of
parchment on the cabin table.

"Then, sirs," said the English captain, "when you have signed it,
this shall acquaint King Henry that ye are his liegemen, and pledge
yourselves, with life, limb, and fortune, to further the English
alliance of His Grace the Duke of Rothesay, on the understanding that
Henry, by his new ambassador, urges your claims to the peerage, and
that, on the espousal day, you each receive the sum of twenty
thousand English crowns."

"It is agreed," said Shaw of Sauchie, as he and Gray touched the pen
of Kraft, who wrote the names they were unable to sign; but
Borthwick, having been educated as a priest, wrote in a bold hand,
amid a multitude of flourishes, _Heu Bortwyck, Knyt_, at the bottom
of this precious document.

"From the Inchcape, gentlemen, we must run over to St. Abb's-head;
and after hanging off the land for a day or two, we will stand again
towards the Tay.  Here, on the evening of the 10th--St. Anthony's
Day--we will be in the offing; if by that time you can give me this
dainty dame to stow under hatch, all your fortunes are made."

"Enough--we shall see to it, Captain Howard," said Sir Patrick Gray,
resuming his mask and cloak.

"Remember this, sir captain," said Borthwick: "the king's chaplain,
James, Bishop of Dunblane, who is returning from Rome, will pass
through England in disguise.  I would recommend his capture, and the
seizure of whatever papers may be found in his possession, for they
may prove of much service to Henry, your king."

"Another thousand crowns to thee, Master Borthwick!  Zookers! man,
thou wilt die rich as a Jew of Lombard-street!  Now then, Kraft, hast
thou scribbled all this into thy devil's log-book?"

"Yes, sir," replied the secretary, securing his volume by a curious
lock in the iron band which encircled it.

"Then fill the wine-pots.  Take another cup, gentlemen," said the
Englishman, with that contempt for his guests which the necessity of
pandering to the snake-like policy of his court could not repress.
"'Tis time we were all in our hammocks; and your boat is waiting,
sirs."

Shaw and Gray, who knew very well that they were in his power, gave
him dark and savage glances; and as they left the cabin, they heard
him issue orders to--

"Lower away the port-lids, larboard and starboard; to run back the
culverins--lash and make fast; to stand off before the land breeze;
for," said he, "we must make the offing ere daybreak--ay, and be hull
down, if we can."

They left the English ship just as the bell rang the middle watch,
and the hoarse voice of the boatswain was heard ringing in prolonged
echoes between decks.  Howard, who mistrusted his visitors, by an
after-thought, came in person to see them over the ship's side, and
into their boat.

"Fare ye well, gentlemen," said he, in his jibing way.  "Adieu, noble
Master Borthwick--I beg pardon--_Sir Hew_.  I hope you will not
forget your visit to Ned Howard, and the good ship _Harry_.  I pray
it may not shorten your cruise for life."

"Hush, hush!" said Shaw, as the oars plunged into the water.

"_Howard and the Harry!_" muttered Jamie Gair, under his thick beard,
as he bent to his oar and slued the boat's head round towards the
land, where the bright-red light of his own cottage window was
streaming on the water, and while the English ship filled her
headsails, and stood off towards the sea.  "My certie! but this
_will_ be braw news for Rabbie Barton and auld Sir Andrew!  Here's
been some fause wark; but I'll spoil your port, fair gentlemen,
lord-barons though ye be; for the admiral shall hear o' this, though
I should hang owre Broughty tower for it."

The mast was stepped, a sail set, and before the south-east wind,
that blew from the Fifeshire hills, the boat glided over the starlit
water like a wild sea-mew.




CHAPTER X.

THE BOATSWAIN'S YARN.

  "Now past the limit, which his course divides,
  When to the north the sun's bright chariot rides;
  We leave the winding bays, and swarthy shores,
  Where Senegal's black wave impetuous roars;
  And now from far the Libyan Cape is seen,
  Since by my mandate called the Cape of Green."
                                            _The Lusiad._


Jamie Gair had the stroke oar, and Borthwick the other; they bent all
their energies to the task of pulling the boat against an ebb-tide,
which was fast leaving bare and dry the Drumilaw Sands, and the long
stretch of desolate beach at the promontory known as the Buddonness.
Jamie kept his ears open to catch any passing remark from the
high-born traitors who occupied the stern-sheets of his boat; but,
full of their own dark thoughts, they remained silent until she was
within a bowshot of the beach, when the Laird of Sauchie said,--

"So, on the evening of the 10th, we must have this dame sailing
merrily at sea!  A perilous promise!"

"Perilous!" said Gray, gruffly; "how so?"

"Ken ye, Sir Patrick, what the law saith anent trysts with
Englishmen?"

"I ken little, and I care less," replied the Knight of Kyneff,
doggedly; "but what says it?"

"That if any Englishman enter the kingdom of Scotland, without the
sign-manual of the king, and is found at kirk or market, or in any
other place, he shall be the lawful prisoner of whoever chooses to
seize him.  That the Scot who brings an Englishman to tryst, shall be
committed to ward, and have his goods escheat.  For such are the laws
of James II. and his parliament of 1455."

"Well, we who are barons of parliament, and make the laws, have
assuredly the power of breaking them.  Besides, he who can lead a
thousand lances to the king's host, can make laws to suit himself."

"But how know ye not, Sir Patrick, but this fellow Borthwick may
betray us."

"He dare not mar his profit and our own."

"The boatman, then--he might suspect us--yea, might speak."

"Assure me of that," hissed the low, deep voice of Gray, "and I will
drive this poniard into his brisket."

Jamie's heart leaped, and he grasped his oar tighter; but at that
moment the boat grounded on the beach, and, while they sprang ashore,
he hooked his kedge-anchor in the sand, placed the oars on his
shoulder, and doffing his bonnet to his honourable employers, turned
away towards the red light that yet streamed from his cottage window.

"Be discreet, good fellow," said Shaw, in an impressive whisper, as
he placed a coin in Jamie's hand.  "Now, fare ye well, carle, and God
speed ye."

"Be close as a steel-vice, Jamie Gair," added Borthwick, "lest I tell
the Lord Chamberlain that there is a rookery in the trees at thy
kailyard, and thou shalt be sorely fined, and mayhap imprisoned in
Broughty; for Beltane time is past, the corn is ripening, and thou
knowest the law."

With these warnings they left him, and, muffled in their cloaks,
strode hastily along the beach, towards where the outline of
Broughty, square, black, and grim, on its rock that jutted into the
ferry, rose between them and the starlit sky--for now the clouds had
disappeared, but the moon had waned.  Jamie turned to look after the
English ship, but though almost shrouded in haze, he could perceive
her standing off towards the south-east with all her sails set.

"An angel--a golden angel!" said Jamie, turning over the bright coin
in his hard hand.  "By my saul, there maun be some dark plot in the
wind when these limbs o' Satan pay sae weel!  Jamie Gair, Jamie Gair!
tak ye tent; for this braw fee may never bring aught but dool and
sorrow to thee and thine.  Now to kiss my doo Mary, and then, ho for
the admiral! for he shall hear o' this hellicate job, though I should
never see another sun blink down the Carse o' Gowrie."

Entering his cottage softly, this honest fellow found his blooming
Mary asleep by the warm ingle.  The fire had smouldered on the
hearth, and the stappit-haddie had been allowed to burn; but the
bicker of spiced ale stood yet by the wooden fender.  Jamie took a
long draught, wiped his mustachios with the back of his brown hand,
kissed Mary, and awoke her.

"Where awa noo, gudeman?" she asked, perceiving that he took up his
walking-staff.

"Dundee, lass."

"Dundee, at this time o' the morning, when you should be beside me in
your bed.  And mind, ye maun awa to the fishing-ground by sun-rise,
Jamie."

"Na, na, lass, I have other bait to my line.  There has been foul
treason on the water this night, Mary, and I maun e'en seek the
admiral; but, 'odsake, say nae word o' this to the neighbours, or the
hellicate Captain o' Broughty may mak ye a widow before your time,
lassie.  In a siccar place, put by the braw gowden fee, till we see
what comes o't, lest dool and disgrace fa' on us.  And now, lass,
fare ye well;" and pulling his broad bonnet over his face, Jamie
departed for Dundee.

The keep of Broughty was reddening in the rising sun, as the
fisherman passed it, on the landward side, for safety and
concealment, keeping as much as possible among the whins and other
wild bushes that grew on the margin of the wide salt marsh which then
stretched from the barbican of the fortress round by the hill of
Balgillo.  The tide had ebbed; the sands of Moniefreth and Barry were
dry, and the bare promontory of the Buddonness stretched far into
that blue sea, on which the three English ships were then diminished
to mere specks.  Jamie gave a last glance to ascertain their course,
and hurried on towards the town.

The summer morning was beautiful; the Tay lay in its basin like a
sheet of glass, on which the ships, the town, and sunlit hills were
mirrored.  The midsummer flowers were mingling with the bluebells,
the crimson foxglove and wild hollyhock; the hill of Balgillo, with
the desert muirland that lay at its base, were waving with purple
heather-cups.  The fisherman's heart expanded joyously with the
beauty of the opening day; and after hurrying past the old castle of
Claypotts, then a seat of the Abbot of Lindores, he reverently said a
short prayer to St. Peter, the patron of his craft, in the little
chapel of St. Rocque of Narbonne, which stood without the
Cowgait-porte, on the east side of the Bitter Burn.  This little
fane, like all other holy edifices in that age, remained open night
and day; and in the principal shrine stood an image of the saint,
having the left breast marked by the cross which appeared upon his
bosom when born into the world.  A little burying-ground encircled
the cell.  From thence a narrow lane, causewayed with large round
sea-stones, and encumbered by outside stairs which ascended upward to
the houses or descended downward to the cellars, where the merchants
were beginning to display their wares, led to the centre of the town,
and to the Kirk of St. Clement, near which another narrow lane then
led directly towards the harbour.

The streets were then unpaved, and were full of gleds and corbies,
which squattered and fed on the offal of the narrow wynds and
fleshers' stalls.

Some of the loiterers at the Craig of St. Nicholas readily permitted
Jamie to use their boat, and in a few minutes he found himself on the
ample deck of his Majesty's _Yellow Frigate_, which was riding with
her head to the stream, her yards all squared to perfection, her
black rigging all taut as iron rods, and her broad blue ensign and
pennon flaunting in the morning wind.

The watch on deck crowded about the early visitor.

"Welcome on board, Jamie Gair," said Master Wad the gunner, who was
in charge of the deck, and was a short-legged personage, with a red
visage, enormous black beard, and stunted figure, encased in a rough
grey gaberdine; "what na wind hath blawn ye here betimes?  Are ye
tired o' your lubberly trade o' fisherman, and come to take service
under the broad pennon o' the admiral?  I marvel muckle ye have na
tired lang syne o' sailing ilka morning to that weary fishing-ground,
like the son o' a shotten herring.  I would rather drink bilge-water
a' my days, than turn fisherman again."

"My best anchor--my bonnie Mary--is still at hame, Maister Wad,"
retorted Jamie; "but we a' ken how your Tib broke from her moorings
and went adrift, naebody kens where."

"Tut--I have ten Marys as gude as yours," replied the gunner, "forbye
a Meinie and a Peg to boot."

"I have nae time for daffin the noo, Maister Wad.  Is the admiral on
board?"

"No--he is at the king's lodging, and has no come off yet; but what
would ye wi' _him_?"

"That which you maunna hear, Willie.  Then, is the Captain Barton on
board?"

"No--he, Sir David Falconer, and a' body else (but the chaplain) are
ashore at St. Margaret's."

Gair stamped his foot, and scratched his beard impatiently.

"Can ye no tell us what's in the wind, man?" asked the seamen, as
they clustered about him, in surprise at his excitement.

"Come," said Cuddie the coxswain, "what can _you_ have to tell the
admiral that we canna hear?  Out wi' it, hand owre hand, man."

"It's something that will find ye a' work for a week to come,
something that may knock the harns out o' half your heads," replied
Gair, angrily.

"I have seen foul weather in my time, brother," growled Archy of
Anster, the boatswain; "and I have seen some gey het work, too,
between the English Channel and the Rock o' Lisbon; but I marvel what
the deil ye drive at, Gair!"

"May I never drink aught but black bilge-water, if I dinna think him
clean daft," added the gunner; "but he canna see the admiral till
mid-day, when the kind's council breaks up; sae, Jamie, after Father
Zuill hath piped all hands to mass, you had better just take your
breakfast wi' us, like a douce man, and meet the admiral after, when
tide and time suit."

Aware that he could not entrust his secret with the seamen, among
whom it would have spread like wildfire, and cost him, perhaps, his
life--for a word from Sir James Shaw, or the tyrannical captain of
Broughty, would be sufficient to hang a poor fisherman among the
rooks that Borthwick spoke of--Jamie was obliged to exert his
patience, and join the seamen at their mess of Lammas ale and
porridge in the forecastle, where, after this humble repast was ever,
Master Wad produced his fiddle, and, after mass was done and the
chaplain gone ashore, sung the famous ditty, still known to our
fishermen, of the

  "Four-and-twenty mermaids, who left the port of Leith,
  To tempt the fine auld hermit, who dwelt upon Inchkeith;
  Nor boat, nor waft, nor crayer, nor craft had they, nor oars or sails,
  Their lily hands were oars enough, their tillers were their tails," &c.


"I could tell ye something mair wonderful than the mermaiden's
voyage, brother," said the grey-haired boatswain, who dearly loved to
spin a yarn whenever he could get listeners.  He was a rough-visaged
Scot, with two great red-spotted cheekbones, a nose that had a
sword-cut across it, and which stuck out between two enormous
whiskers that mingled with his grisly beard.  "Our gude chaplain
thinks to discover a process whereby he can make ships proof to the
shot of culverins--for so he told me yesternight."

"By my faith, old Ropeyarn," said Cuddie the coxswain, who was his
exact counterpart, "that will be better than muddling his brains in
trying to mak burning-glasses that will set a fleet in a bleeze at a
league's distance."

"Brother," said the gunner, striking his large-jointed hands together
emphatically, for between such inventions, it seemed not improbable
that his profession would prove a useless one; "brother, I ken
navagation as weel as maist men; I have run all Europe down twenty
times, frae the North Cape to the Gut o' Gibraltar--ay, I have seen
the Rio Grande, and the great peak 'o the Fortunate Isles, that rises
right out o' the sea like a spear-head, and flames like a torch; I
have seen the sea-devils that swim round the Cape de Verd, where the
glinting o' the moon makes men mad, and where St. Elmo's light dances
like a will-o'-the-wisp on the main-mast heid: yet it is a blessed
light, for it ever precedes a calm: but may I ne'er drink aught but
bilge, if I can swallow a yarn like yours.  I have seen muckle in my
time, but never saw I a ship's side that would turn a cannon-shot, or
a sail that had a hole burned in it by a mirror ten miles awa; yet
our chaplain pretends to ken o' baith.  My word on't, lads, he sails
beyond his commission, and will be brought up all standing, some day,
by the bishops, for sorcery, maybe."

"He is as gude a man as ever trod a plank," said the coxswain, "but
his noddle hath as many crotchets as the dog-star hath rays.  Minnows
and mackerel! to believe in shot-proof ships!"

"Why not?" asked the boatswain, gruffly.  "I'll tell ye what I have
seen, messmate--a shot-proof man.  Now what think ye o' that; one, at
least, who was proof to steel."

"I'll tell ye when I hear, brother," replied the seaman: "was it one
o' the antipodes, who walk on their heads?"

"Weel, I care na if I spin the yarn before the watch is called," said
the boatswain; "but first, here is to the gude saut water, and a'
that live on't!" and he poured down his capacious throat the last of
the ale, and after wiping his mouth three or four times with the cuff
of his gaberdine, spitting twice through an open port, and fixing his
eyes on the beam overhead, he thrust his hands into his pockets,
placed his logs on the deck, his back against a gun-carriage, and
began thus:--

"Ye maun ken, messmates, that after leaving the Gut o' Gibraltar, we
were beating westward against a head-wind.  Our craft was the _Peggie
o' Pittenweem_, hameward bound from Barcelona, for Leith, wi' a mixed
cargo o' wine and oil, fruit, cork, and hides, and Sir Andrew, the
admiral, who was then but a sma' merchant-skipper, had ten brass
culverins in her, forbye some braw pateraroes along her gunnel, for
the behoof o' the heathen Moors o' Barbary if they daured to meddle
wi' us.  After losing sight o' the Castle of Gibraltar, and the
chapels of our Lady of Europe and our Lady of Africa, that stand on
ilka shore, the wind veered round to the north-west, and we were
obliged to bear right away before it for well nigh a week, till we
had mony fears o' being blawn round Cape None, or getting into the
downhill currents, that bear ships away to the southern pole; or,
what is waur, being blown off the earth a'thegether: for the warld is
round, ye ken, just like my bonnet," continued this ancient mariner,
balancing the article named in his hands; "and flat, as ye may see,
for the sun dips down to port at night, and then comes up to
starboard in the morning, rising at the edge, like this penny piece.
Weel, ye wad flee owre its margin if ye stood on owre long wi' your
canvas set, and so be launched out into space like a hoodie craw.
The ship o' auld Sir Patrick Spens was ance a' owre but the waist,
when the current swept her back again, and then she hauled her wind.
At last we saw the high peak o' the Fortunate Isles rising frae the
sea, vomiting fire and brimstone, its side covered in one place wi'
glistening snow, in another wi' a forest o' green laurel bushes,
wherein the yellow birds o' the Canaries built their nests in the
warm sunshine.

"The gale deid awa, and the sails flapped against the masts and
rattlins; the sea became like glass, and there was sae little wind
that the _Peggie_ wouldna answer her helm; but it mattered little,
for Sir Andrew and auld Gibbie o' Crail had been in these seas
before, and we kent our whereabouts.  We were within less than half a
mile o' the shore, but in fifty fathoms water by the line.  There was
nae current, and the ship lay like a log, wi' her decks blistering in
the sun.  Sir Andrew thought it wad be a gude time to get fresh
water, for our last pint was in the scuttlebutt; sae we hove up
twelve casks, the crews o' the yawl and pinnace were piped awa, and
cheerily we shipped our oars, and pulled for the shore, as I weel
mind, singing merrily the auld ballad,--

  "'Oh, who is he has dune this deed,
    And tauld the king o' me,
  And sent us oot at this time o' year,
    To sail upon the sea?'

Every man o' us had a durk and gude braid Banffshire whinger in his
belt, forbye ten that were armed wi' crossbows, for Sir Andrew kent
of auld that the Guanchos o' the Fortunate Isles were unchancey
chields to warsle wi'.  Gibbie o' Crail, wha had served wi' the
Spanish buccaneers under the Captain Bocca Roxa (he whom Barton slew
off Cape Ortegal), tauld us that they had once landed there, and put
a hail village to fire and sword, and that wi' his ain hand he had
killed the prince o' the place by a slash _across the nose_ wi' his
boarding-axe.

"We landed at a sma' bit creek among black rocks, covered wi' ashes,
dust, and pumice-stane; but among them grew the green sugar-cane, the
olive, and the bonnie cotton-tree.  The wee birds wi' their gouden
wings flew aboot frae branch to branch, singing in the bright
sunshine.  A' the sweets o' summer were there, and they wiled mony o'
our messmates awa frae the wark o' filling and bunging the
water-casks to stray in the laurel woods that grow on the base o'
that tremendous peak, which is five leagues nigh frae the water-line
to the Deil's Cauldron on the tap, where the red brimstone burns day
and night.  Ay, Jamie Gair, ye think muckle o' the craigs o'
Dunnotter; but I wish ye saw Adam's Peak, in the Fortunate Isles!

"The fresh water was delightful as milk, and the grapes that hung
owre the pumice-stane rocks were sweeter than heather honey; and sae,
despite Sir Andrew's orders, twa or three o' us, including Sandie
Mathieson, a Leith man, strayed a mile or mair into the island,
flinging our braid bonnets after the gouden birds, eating grapes and
wild honey in some places, tumbling knee-deep in soft sulphur and
spongy pumice-stane, until we found the entrance o' a cave, for a'
the warld like ane o' the weems in the Fife, and, sailor-like, we
scrambled in to see what was there, and my faith, messmates, we saw a
sicht to mind o'!

"In that cave were mair than twa hundred deid corpses, a rankit up in
rows against the walls; for it was a burial place for the Guanchos,
who, instead of putting their deid like Christians into a grave,
bathe and parboil them in butter and wild lavender, black gum and
wild sage--for sae Father Zuill told me; and after drying them in the
sunshine in summer, and the cauld breezes in winter, they sow them up
in goatskins, and then the mummies are hard as a ship's figure-head,
yea, and harder, for they will never decay; and there they stood, twa
hundred or mair, wi' their tanned visages and sichtless eyen, their
hair and beards all brushed and plaited, and as if they yet lived;
and oh, there was an awesome grin on their shrivelled maws!

"It was a sight even for a sailor to scunner at, and we glowered at
them for awhile, ilk ane o' us ashamed to be the first to put up his
helm and be off.  At last Gibbie o' Crail, an auld sea-horse, that
feared nocht, and had mair owre a gude dram under his hatches, began
to examine them, in the hope of finding some braw goud or trinket;
and solemnly Mathieson and I warned him to let the deid corpses
alane; but he laughed, and tumbled them owre like nine-pins.  There
was ane, a great stark and brawny corpse, wi' a lang scar across its
nose, and twa precious stanes, like emeralds, glinting where its eyen
should be.  Gibbie said, wi' an oath, that he was sure it was the
prince o' the Guanchos, whom he had slain twenty years before, and
wi' a dab o' his jocketeleg, picked out one of the emeralds.  But lo!

"At that moment the jaws opened, and there came frae them a yell that
shook the dust frae the cavern roof; that seemed to mak the corpses
start, and made Gibbie spring ten feet awa; and then we turned and
fled, wi' every hair on our heids bristling; and without ever daring
ance to look astern, we cam' plunging doon the side o' the peak,
through the laurel bushes and owre the sulphur banks, till we reached
the creek, where the yawl and the pinnace, wi' the last o' the
water-casks, were about putting off, and mair deid than alive wi'
terror, we sprang on board.  We were just in time to reach the boats
and get a rope's-ending for disobeying orders; for though Sir Andrew
was but a skipper then, as I tauld ye, he kept a tight hand owre his
crew."

"May I drink bilge if ever I--" began the gunner.

"That evening a favourable breeze sprang up, and we bore away for
hame: but as the gloaming fell that breeze freshened to a gale, the
rain sowed the sea, and the red lightning flashed at the far horizon.
Gibbie, Mathieson, and I were on the first nicht-watch; we were
restless, and fearfu' o' coming evil, and we nestled in our storm
doublets under the lee o' the foremast; and though we would a' hae
fain spoken o' that awesome adventure, we never once referred to it;
but sat listening to the dreary wind, as it whistled under the leech
o' the foresail, or watching the waves that ran past us, like lang
black ridges o' ink.  A' at ance an unco blast took us a' aback!  Sir
Andrew jumped on deck in a moment, and ordered us to double-reef the
mainsail and fore topsail; and after this it became sae dark and
eerie, that we couldna see a crossbow-shot ahead.

"Amid the soughin' o' the wind and the hiss o' the waves we heard a
strange cry rising from that terrible sea--a cry that made our blood
curdle!  We rushed to the weather-bow, and after a time could discern
a man's head, as he rose at times, bobbing like a fisherman's float
upon the crests of the foaming ocean, or as he sank doon into its
gloomy trough; but again and again the eldritch cry went past us on
the gusty wind.

"'A man overboard!' cried Sir Andrew through his trumpet; 'and in sic
a sea!  Forecastle there--see ye anything, lads?'

"I kenna what possessed us, but none o' us made any answer.  To back
the foreyard or render any assistance were, we thought, impossible;
but Sir Andrew, wha does mony a thing other men would never think o',
on hearing the first cry, knotted a line to a handspike, and getting
a glimpse o' the man in the water as he was swept past our bows,
flung it right at him like a harpoon, and we saw him catch it--yea,
almost without an effort, as it seemed.  Then the starboard watch,
who had come on deck, towed him aboard, and he cam' up the ship's
side by the main chains, like a cat or a squirrel, and stood dripping
wet among us, a strong and sturdy child, wi' a brown skin, and grisly
and matted hair.  Gibbie held up a ship's lantern to tak' a view o'
his face, and then I saw that he was almost bare bones, brawn, and
skin, wi' a long scar _across his nose_, and but one eye, that
glittered like green glass, while the other socket was _empty_, like
a walnut-shell.  We felt as if the deck would open under our teet,
for we knew it was the dead Guancho!

"I could feel puir Gibbie tremble as we slunk forward, leaving the
skipper and crew to question the stranger, whose answers satisfied
them, I suppose, but we couldna hear them for the lashing o' the sea
and roaring o' the wind, as it soughed through the rigging.  A can o'
usquebaugh was offered to the Guancho, but he shook his head; and
then clothes were offered him, but he preferred his ain, a pair o'
goat-skin breeks with the hair on the outside.  The wind shifted--the
squalls cam' oftener, and in a wee while Sir Andrew had stripped the
_Peggie_ to her staysail and trysail; we sounded the pumps, and had
twa men at the tiller; all hands were on deck, and though the crew
muttered doubtfully and fearfully under their beards to ilk other
anent the strange loon that had come on board in sic weather, there
were none that shared the terror o' Sandie, Gibbie, and mysel', for
in our hearts we kent that a deid corpse was sailing wi' us on that
mirk midnight sea, and that the ship and a' its companie were doomed!
The wind was still roaring, and about three bells in the middle-watch
the staysail gave way, and I heard Sir Andrew shout through his
trumpet,--

"'Yare, yare, my lads! down wi' the staysail--bend on the sheet and
right it again.'

"We three rushed to obey the order, but the ship broached to, and
before we could recover her again, and while that devilish Guancho
uttered an eldritch yell, a sea took her right on the broadside, and
burst over the decks, sweeping boats, booms, scuttlebutt, skylights,
and four men overboard; but the masts o' pine frae Falkland Woods
stood brawly, and then we let her drive before the storm.  We were
certain the _Peggie_ was a doomed ship now, unless we got rid o' the
fiend that was aboard o' her; and we three consulted in what manner
it should be dune.  As yet the nicht was dark as pitch tar; no' a ray
o' light was glimmering, and we saw the Guancho standing by the
weather fore-rigging, wi' his one eye shining at times like a green
star.  Gibbie, who was a ferocious auld buckie, proposed to gie him a
cloure wi' a capstan-bar, or a dab wi' his durk, while we should
chuck him overboard; and wi' our hearts fu' o' fear and hatred, we
resolved upon this, for we dreaded sairly lest our crew should be
washed awa man by man, and we be left alane wi' the Guancho, and led
to destruction.  It was an unco wild night, and noo the lightning
glinted between the scudding clouds breaking sea wi' a green and
ghastly glare.

"Wi' muckle o' fear and mair o' desperation in our hearts, we drew
near the Guancho, who stood by the gunnel grinning at the passing
waves.  None could see us, either forward or aft, for the crew were
busy enough, and kept aloof frae the stranger.

"'Heave, Gibbie, heave, and wi' a will!' cried I, as I grasped him by
the breeks.  Gibbie took his heels, and we shot him richt owre into
the deep black trough o' the hungry sea; and then on swept the ship,
like a shot frae a culver in, and as if relieved o' half her cargo.

"'Mony hands mak licht wark,' said Sandie.

"'But the Lord forgie us if we hae dune wrang,' quo' I, taking off my
bonnet at His name.

"'Wrang!' growled Gibbie; 'wrang to drown a deid man!  I could swear
that his ankles were but dry banes as I hove him owre the bulwark.'

"The _Peggie_ laboured hard and creaked in a' her timbers, the wind
howled, and now a wave like Ailsa Craig came roaring after her.

"'Beware, my lads, beware fore and aft!' cried Sir Andrew through his
trumpet.  The three of us grasped the starboard rattlins, and at that
moment another heavy sea poured like a torrent owre the decks o' the
_Peggie_.  Our mate, Mathieson's brother, and another seaman were
swept away; for a time, the ship trembled and was settling down.  By
my life, had one more wave like that rolled on her, she had gane doon
into the trough and never risen mair; but the water ran off her; she
swam like a duck, and again shot on, though the foresail was
splitting to ribbons.

"'St. Clement be near us!' whispered Gibbie.  'Look, Archy--look
Sandy!' and there, just where we had pitched him owerboard, was the
Guancho, standing by the starboard gunnel, grinning and laughing as
before.  Naebody on deck had missed him, and nane but oursels kent
that the same sea which had swept awa our mate, had washed the
storm-fiend on board again.

"Towards morning the gale subsided, and the grey daylicht cam in
through a mirk and louring sky, to brighten a rowing sea.  We were
cheerless and sad.  The men muttered among themsels, and were aye in
pairs, keeping aloof frae their unco shipmate; and even Sir Andrew
liked him but little, and promised that he should be set upon the
first land we came to.  For five days we drifted about, and wist not
where we were; for, as the sun was hidden, our captain couldna win an
observation wi' the cross-staff.  He asserted that we were blown
right out into the Atlantic, where never ship sailed before; but
Gibbie, wha kent these seas o' auld, averred that we would sune mak
the coast o' Mogadore, which belonged to the king o' the Moors.  Yet
our brave captain proved to be right.

"For these five days and nights, the Guancho did nocht else but mope
about the deck, and grin whenever Gibbie cam near him; but our men
worked hard to repair the damage o' the gale.  We bent on four new
sails, reeved some o' the rigging anew, shipped a new foretopmast,
and, after taking an observation, bore away for Madeira.

"Gibbie aye gied the Guancho a wide berth on deck, and kept as much
aloft as possible.  For three hail days he sat perched in the
craw's-nest; and three times I took the tiller for him at night, as
he was ever in mortal terror when the awesome thing cam nigh him.  We
crowded every stitch o' canvas, carrying mair o' nights than the
skipper kent o'; and twice nearly ran the _Peggie_ under water, in
our eagerness to reach the land.  A this time the Guancho ate little
or nocht, but a grain or sae o' maize; and mony o' our men, wha,
owercome wi' weariness, had slept on their watch, had frightfu'
dreams, and averred that the Guancho pressed their throats in the
night and sucked their blood; for they fand bite-marks about their
necks in the morning;--but then the _Peggie_ was swarming wi' Norway
rottens.  The terror increased; men spoke in whispers; and day by
day, this awsome Guancho sat in the lee scuppers, motionless as if
deid, and only moved and girned when Gibbie drew near or passed it,
which he aye did sidelong, wi' his hand on his durk; and three times
the thing pointed to his eyeless socket, from whilk Gibbie had howked
the shining stane.

"On the fifth night o' this horrid voyage, Mathieson and I had the
foretop.  We were on the look-out for land.  The _Peggie_ was going
free, about eight knots or sae; and having now to take his helm,
Gibbie stood by the binnacle, and, Gude kens, we watched the deck
mair than the horizon for four hours o' that dreary night.  The
Guancho sat, as usual, in the lee scuppers, and a wet berth it was.
About the middle-watch, we saw him rise and creep towards Gibbie,
whose een were fixed on the sails--for he was a gude steersman, and
aye loed to keep them full.  I think I see him noo, as he stood wi'
his siller hair and red face glinting in the light o' the binnacle
lamps; his feet planted firm on the deck, and his hands gripping the
lion's head that was carved on the tiller-end; and he sawna the fiend
that drew nigh him!

"'Deck ho!' I shouted.  'Gibbie, man--mind yoursel!' but the wind
swept my cry to leeward; and a' at ance the Guancho sprang upon the
puir helmsman--there was a despairing cry, an eldritch yell, and the
demon dashed him against the larboard stanchions, a breathless and a
brainless corpse.

"Wi' the wild cry that rose frae the deck, a' was owre!

"Unhanded, the tiller swayed frae side to side; the vessel fell awa
round like lightning; her canvas was a' taen aback, and her topmasts
went crash to leeward by the caps.  We were a wreck in a moment.

"In a trice Sir Andrew was on deck.  Sandy and I cam doon the
backstay by the run, and 'out hatchets' was the word, to dear us of
the wreck; and under the foresail, mainsail, and gib, we entered the
roads of Funchal, and anchored off the Castle of St. James, to refit,
procure fresh water, Madeira, hock, and provisions."

"But what o' this deevil wi' the green ee?" asked Willie Wad,
impatiently.

"Anger got the better o' our fear.  We sprang upon him the moment the
ship was safe; a desperate tulzie began, for every blow o' his bony
hands was like a cloure frae a smith's hammer, and he knocked our
best men owre like ninepins; his eldritch yells were like the
whistling wind, and he laughed and kicked, when at last we laid him
sprawling on the deck, and, while our hearts boiled wi' fear and
fury, lashed him hard and fast by neck and heels to ringbolts.  Some
proposed to heave him overboard, wi' a shot at his craig, but Sir
Andrew wouldna hear o' that; and as soon as we dropped anchor at
Funchal, the Guancho was handed owre to the Dominicans and the
Commander of the Order of Christ, who put him in a vault o' the
Castle of St. James, to thole a trial for sorcery and murder.  Our
story filled a' Funchal wi' terror and consternation.  A lang
procession o' Dominican Fathers, carrying relics, crosses, banners,
and holy-water pots, marched to the Castle o' St. James, to exorcise
the demon; and the holy-water, when it fell frae the asperges on his
brown hide, hissed as if it sputtered on iron in a white heat, and he
girned at the priests like a marmoset.  At last, finding that
exorcism and blessed water were used alike in vain, the Portuguese
Dominicans and the Knights of Christ betuik themsels to prayer, and
after solemn high mass is the great church, visited the Guancho again.

"They found him free o' his fetters, and laughing like a wild imp,
while he gied the finishing strokes to a great galley or boat, which
he had chalked, wi' its sails set, and twenty rowers at their
paddles, on his dungeon wall.  They marvelled sairly at this strange
employment, for one wha's funeral fire stood burning in the castle
yard; but a glamour was owre them, and nane dared approach him.

"Then the brown deevil drew the waves below the galley sae lifelike,
that _they_ seemed to roll and _it_ to heave, while the rowers began
to paddle, and a low wild chant was heard, as they a paddled and kept
time.  Then he drew a ladder, wi' two perpendicular strokes and sax
horizontal ones; and then he _stepped on board_, wi' anither o' his
eldritch yells.  The rowers began to paddle harder than ever, and
while their sang died awa, it sailed clean off the wall wi' him, and
left ne'er a trace behind.

"A Knight of Christ sprang forward, but the place was empty, clear o'
its evil tenant, and no a vestige o' the fairy-ship remained upon the
dungeon wall.  Noo, what think ye o' _that_ story, messmates?"

"By my faith, I would rather drink bilge a' my days than once sail
the sea wi' a deevil in the ship's companie," said Willie Wad.

"Puir Gibbie o' Crail ended his life as I told ye, and sleeps in his
hammock among the mermaids," said the boatswain, rising from the
gun-carriage; "but Sandy, our messmate, hath left me a lang way
astern, for he is now Sir Alexander Mathieson, Knight--_the King of
the Sea_, and captain o' yonder gallant caravel, while I am only auld
Archy the boatswain.  And, see, yonder his barge is shoved off frae
the Craig o' St. Nicholas, and pulled straight for the _Queen
Margaret_."

"Which shows that the king's council maun e'en be owre, and 'tis time
I were awa to the Admiral," said Jamie Gair, as through an open
gun-port, the gilded boat referred to, was seen to leave the rock of
St. Nicholas, with a banner waving at its stern, where three or four
gentlemen, wearing rich dresses, were seated; and, with sixteen
bright-bladed oars flashing in the meridian sun, it was pulled across
the shining river directly towards the consort of the _Yellow
Frigate_.




CHAPTER XI.

CHAINING THE UNICORN.

  "Quaint old town of toil and traffick, quaint old town of art and song,
  Mem'ries haunt thy painted gables, like the rooks that round them throng;
  Mem'ries of the middle ages, when thy sovereigns rough and bold,
  Had their dwelling in thy castle, time-defying, centuries old."
                                                        LONGFELLOW.


While the boatswain was spinning his incredible yarn in the
forecastle of the frigate, the king, after being at mass in the
chapel of St. Salvador, which stood near the palace of St. Margaret,
on a rocky eminence to the north side of the High-street and
Overgaitt, proceeded to the hall of this ancient residence, where the
great officers of state were to assemble, and where he was to receive
the ambassadors of Louis XI.

This old apartment was of great height, and was lighted by six
round-headed windows; its roof was an arch of solid stone, spanned
also by six sculptured ribs, that sprang from capitals, the floor was
of oak, which had been split into planks by wedges, in the old
Scottish fashion, roughly dressed by the axe, and secured by
large-headed iron nails.  The hall bore the impress of the
architectural genius of the early part of the Middle Ages: the
mouldings, the corbels, the flowered bosses, the ribs and mullions of
the windows, were bold and massive, and the subdued light of a calm
bright morning stole softly through their painted lozenges and
crimson draperies.  Old tapestries of green and amber colour,
representing in quaint and mis-shapen figures the virtues and
miracles of St. Margaret, the valour and death of her husband,
clothed the walls of this sombre hall.  The fair fingers of six
Scottish princesses, viz., Margaret the Dauphiness of France,
Elizabeth of Brittany, Jane of Huntly, Elinor of Austria, Mary of
Campvere, and the Lady Annabella, all daughters of James I., had
woven, in Dunfermline Tower, the stern romances which hung on
tenter-hooks of steel around those ancient walls.  At the lower end
was a buffet, on which stood a gigantic thistle, with its stamens
composed of English swordblades, and its bristles of poniards, all
gathered from the victorious field of Sark; at the upper, was the
large fireplace, surmounted by the royal arms, and from each of the
antique crowns by which the supporters--the white unicorns--were
gorged, there depended a gilded _chain_.

This new and most remarkable addition to the imperial arms of the
kingdom was soon remarked by several of the nobles, who muttered
together, as they gathered in groups, awaiting the entrance of the
king.

"It is significant of the chain he would bind around us," said the
Earl of Angus, with one of his dark and bitter smiles, as he thrust
his furred cap of maintenance over his dark and shaggy brows.

"But 'tis a chain the sword can easily sever," added Sir James Shaw.

This trifling affair shed a gloom over all the courtiers, who were
rapidly assembling, all clad in rich and magnificent dresses.
Accompanied by Sir David Falconer, Captain Barton, and Sir Alexander
Mathieson, a wiry old seaman, the admiral arrived, and many of the
proudest peers felt themselves constrained to greet the brave old man
with courtesy and outward respect.

"My Lord of Angus," said Robert Barton, frankly, kissing the hand of
Scotland's greatest noble, "God bless thee for avenging my poor
father on the Howards and their Northumbrian kerne.  From my soul I
thank thee!"

"Thank me not, good Robert Barton," replied the earl, with boldness;
"for though but a trader, thy father was a true Scot, and a brave
one."

At this reply Barton's eyes flashed, and Sir Andrew bestowed on the
speaker a frown.

"This haughty admiral does not bow very low, I think," whispered Sir
Patrick Gray of Kyneff.

"He who can stand upright in the presence of _honest_ men, needs not
to bow in the presence of _great_ ones," retorted Sir Andrew, who
overheard the remark.

At that moment the curtain at the lower end of the hall was drawn
aside, and the king entered, preceded and followed by a brilliant
retinue of ladies and nobles; Colin of Argyle, the Lord High
Chancellor; Knollis, the Lord High Treasurer; the Bishop of Dunkeld,
who was Secretary of State; Patrick Leith, a learned canon of
Glasgow, who was Lord Clerk Registrar; Sir William Halkett of
Belfico, the Judge of Justiciary; the Great Chamberlain, the Master
of the Household, the Standard Bearer, and a crowd of other courtiers
and favourites followed; among them were many ladies, but those who
attracted most attention were the Duchess of Montrose, with her
conical head-dress, and Margaret Drummond, yet pale and sad, and, as
such, contrasting with her sisters, who were all
brightness--beautiful and blushing with pleasure and
excitement,--especially little Lizzie and Beatie, who wore their rich
gifts, the silver collar and veil of lace.

The Duke of Rothesay, whose only attendant was his friend the young
Lord Lindesay, kept himself a little apart from this variously
attired crowd, which divided in two as the king assumed his lofty
chair, which was placed on a carpeted dais, and under a cloth of
estate, or canopy of purple velvet, which was then the royal colour
in Scotland.

The king bowed and smiled to all around him; but under those smiling
acknowledgments there was, too painfully visible, that thoughtful
expression which resulted from those bitter dissensions and civil
broils that in past years had wrinkled the handsome face and seared
the generous heart of James III.

He wore a jacquette and tight hose of white satin, embroidered with
Venetian gold, and over the former a loose surcoat of blue velvet,
without sleeves, but furred with miniver; his sword, dagger, and belt
sparkled with jewels, and around his neck were the orders of the
Thistle and St. Michael the Archangel.  His blue bonnet was borne by
a pretty little page,--a royal _protégé_,--who was the son, not of a
noble, but of some poor mendicant, who had attracted his notice, one
day, when passing the Bridge of Dunblane.  His hose reached to his
feet,--for stockings, apart from hose, were then unknown.  The first
pair ever seen in Britain were worn by Henry VIII. of England, who
obtained them from Spain, and his little successor, Edward VI., was
solemnly presented with a pair by Sir Thomas Gresham.

Angus, Lord Home, Lord Hailes, Sir James Shaw, Sir Patrick Gray, the
Laird of Keir, and others of that fierce noblesse, who never laid
aside their iron coats, and who despised the almost effeminate
dresses, the laces, ruffles, and ribbons of the courtiers, stood in
whispering and observant groups.  Apart from these and such as these,
who were too often the curse and betrayers of their country, were
grouped a few of those learned men whom, like a true Stuart, the king
loved and cherished.

Among them were three Benedictine priests, viz., John Abercrombie, a
vigorous writer against the dawning heresies in the Church; Alexander
Barclay, the translator of Sallust; and Robert Henrison, author of
the _Bluidy Serk_ and _Ye Burrowstoun Mouse and ye Landwart Mouse_;
Father Zuill, the learned chaplain to Sir Andrew Wood; John
Bellenden, then the greatest poet in Scotland, and afterwards
Archdeacon of Moray; the learned Andrew Forman, the Proto-notary
Apostolic of the kingdom, in after years the most famous of our
churchmen, and the mediator between Pope Julius II. and Louis XII.,
David Steele, who wrote the _Thrie Priestis of Peblis_, and many
other poor poets, who subsisted on the good king's privy purse, and
wrote odes, ballads, and songs for a small yearly fee and the gift of
a camlet gown, a bonnet and shoes, at St. Martin's-Mass and White
Sunday.  In the bearded visages of all these sable-gowned and
black-capped literati, there were plainly visible a peculiar mixture
of self-conceit and pedantic pride, tempered by an unpleasant
timidity; for some of the smaller satirists, like Steele, were
eminently obnoxious to the nobles; yet it was to this group that the
impolitic king first addressed himself.

"Come hither, Father Barclay," said he to the gifted translator of
Sallust; "I have just read thy noble satire, _The Ship of Fools_, and
owe thee a chain of gold for it.  I prefer it to thy _History of the
Jugurthine War_; but we must imprint both, if we can get those newly
invented iron letters from Germany.  By my honour, Barclay, a scholar
such as thou--or one like thee, Abercrombie, or any of ye--might well
become the mentor of a king!  I may mistake," he added, turning to
his gloomy-eyed peers, "but I assure you, my lords, that nobility of
mind is more acceptable to me than nobility of name."

With a grotesque mixture of fear and pleasure, Barclay kissed the
hand of the king.  Angus glanced scornfully at his friends, and
Kyneff whispered,

"Thou seest, my Lord Earl, how this doting king hath not even policy
enough to gild the chain by which he would fetter the unicorn."

Wood now approached and presented to James his three favourite
officers--old Sir Alexander Mathieson, Sir David Falconer, and Robert
Barton.

"God's benison on thee, my old king of the sea," said James, clasping
the hard rough hand of the venerable captain of the _Margaret_; "and
on thee, too, Barton.  To thee I leave the duty of avenging thy
slaughtered father.  His estate of Barnton shall be created into a
free barony, and his services shall never be forgotten.  But come
_thou_ hither, Davie Falconer," added James, who, to mortify his
nobles, never omitted an opportunity of distinguishing one of the
people.  "I owe thee something for that brave fight with the Spanish
caravel in the English waters, but I know not what it may be--unless
this trinket, for the time;" and taking from his finger a ring, he
presented it to the arquebussier, whose heart swelled within him with
sudden gratitude and joy; and then his eyes sought those of Sybilla
Drummond.  His heart leaped anew, for it was full of all that a
strong and beautiful passion can kindle in a profound and sensitive
nature.

"Sir David," continued the king, "thy father died on the deck of his
ship for mine; and to feel that I have such subjects as thee and
Barton, is to feel the true pleasure of being a king.  Go--from my
soul I love all such brave and honest fellows!"

"'Twas I who first made men of them both," said Sir Andrew Wood, "and
who gave them a relish for gunpowder and salt water.  Gadzooks!
confess, Robert Barton, when first thou camest aboard thou couldst
neither hand, reef, nor steer, clamber aloft, grease a mast, handle
oar, culverin, or caliver.  All these I taught him, your majesty, and
made a man and a sailor of him!"

"This day makes poor David Falconer the envy and the hatred of the
nobles," said Barclay the translator to Father Zuill.

"'Tis false, sirrah," growled the laird of Sauchie, who overheard the
remark, which was made a little too audibly; "he is a brave fellow,
who has won his spurs as he wins his daily bread by knight's service
and the sword.  Were he a cutter of stones, like the umquhile
Cochrane, a fiddler, like William Rogers, or a useless scribbler,
like thee, I would care little to see him gang the gate those loons
were sent at Lauder."

"Alas, noble sir," urged the Benedictine, submissively, "Cochrane was
a most unfortunate man----"

"He was a villain," said the Earl of Angus; "a dyvour who had turned
heretic in his heart, and carried a Bible at his belt by a silver
chain--a Bible printed in black letters by a German sorcerer, even
such as the king would employ to print thy written book.  Enough,
sir!"

After this, the priest had nothing more to urge.

"Father Zuill," said the king to the chaplain of the _Yellow
Frigate_, "I am glad to see thee, and have received thy learned
treatise on the burning glasses of the ancients, which I hope to
peruse with pleasure; though I doubt mickle if you will ever
supersede our cannon-balls.  I have desired his grace of Montrose to
present you with a copy of Virgil, by Caxton the Englishman."

Confronting the lofty and arrogant eyes of the nobility, Falconer,
who was armed like themselves, but less richly, retired towards the
curtained doorway, where his arquebussiers were stationed, with the
Montrose Herald and Garioch Pursuivant.

"This _protégé_ of Wood," said Sir Patrick Gray, "is a coxcomb, whose
profound admiration of his own person--"

"Is only surpassed by his profound loyalty and respect for his native
monarch," said Lady Euphemia Drummond, bluntly interrupting him, as
she and her sisters drew near their father.  Sybilla, who blushed
with anger at Gray, gave her tall, pale eldest sister, a glance full
of gratitude; but the governor of Broughty, whom the words native
monarch had stung deeply, bit his white lips with sudden anger, and
relapsed into silence.

"How the devil doth it come to pass," said the imperious Lord
Drummond, "that this churl, Falconer, who hath neither lands nor
rents coming in, wears a scarlet mantle like a landed baron?"

"'Tis the growing insolence of the class he springs from," replied
Sir James Shaw, haughtily, drawing his own rich mantle over his
breast.

Poor Sybilla put down her fine face with timid sorrow, on hearing her
lover spoken of thus.

"Well, my Lord Angus," said Drummond, as they all drew a little apart
into one of the deep windows; "by your presence here this morning, am
I to conclude you have become a faithful counsellor of the king?"

"As you have, my lord," replied the dark Angus, with a courtly but
crafty smile; for each was quite equal to and understood by the other.

"Your followers have valued lightly the new edict anent wearing
swords in the king's vicinity!"

"As Scottish men should ever value such infamous edicts," replied
Bell-the-cat, with a dark frown; "I have five hundred lances from the
Howe stabled in the close of St. Salvador, and should like to see any
one enforce the edict on them."

"Angus," said Drummond, with a deep glance, "where will all this
loyalty and this disloyalty, this open flattery and secret
discontent, end?"

"_On the field of battle_," was the hoarse reply, whispered through a
thick and wiry beard; and the timid Margaret Drummond trembled as she
heard it, and drooped her soft, dark eyes, on finding the keen glance
of Kyneff fixed as it was from time to time upon her with mingled
curiosity and pity,--if in such a heart as his there might be pity.

Amid all this court intrigue and sea of plotting, but aloof from it,
stood the Duke of Rothesay, conversing with his friend and follower,
the princely heir of Crawford.  He saw only Margaret, whom he loved
with all the heedless ardour of a boy, and was quite oblivious of the
many fair ones, possessing no ordinary amount of charms, who were
clustered around the Duchess of Montrose; and there were not a few
who whispered into each other's pretty ears many a compliment on
Rothesay's handsome figure and face.  On this morning he was dressed
almost entirely in white satin, slashed with blue and edged with
gold.  Margaret Drummond was attired in the same colours, which so
well became her fair complexion and blonde hair.  In the presence of
the king, though he seldom addressed her, she always felt a dread, as
of one against whom she had committed a wrong in becoming the wife of
his son.  She was ever apprehensive that his calm, inquiring eye
might read her secret.  She was pale as marble; and from time to time
applied to her little pink nostrils a gold pomander ball, which was
filled with scented paste, and such as were then used before the
introduction of pouncet boxes.  This had been one of Rothesay's
earliest love-gifts to her.

Kyneff and Sauchie had been closely watching Rothesay and their
beautiful victim, but found themselves completely at fault and unable
to discover any glances, signs, or tokens of intelligence passing
between them; and Kyneff, who, although he could be politic and wary
at times, was generally coarse, reckless, and bold, resolved to probe
the matter at once, and dared to do so in the following manner:--

"I have a boon to beg of your highness this morning," said he, in his
easiest and most familiar tone.

"A boon--thou?" asked the prince, with the coldness of instinctive
distrust.  "Well, Sir Patrick?"

"I have taken the liberty of addressing your highness on the dearest
secret of my heart," said he in a low voice, and twirling his
mustachios, while he drew the prince aside, and with his stealthy
eyes bestowed a covert glance on Sir James Shaw; "I crave your
influence with one of your most favoured courtiers--for--for--"

"For what--do not be _bashful_, Sir Patrick--his purse?"

"Nay, his daughter's hand."

"I crave in turn to be excused, for I would be exceedingly loth to
assist a fowler so deadly as thee in meshing a poor little dove."

"But I am one of the most faithful servants of your highness and of
the king."

"Well--and you are in love?"

"Prince, I have just had the honour of saying so."

"But with whom, Sir Patrick?"

"A woman--"

"Of course, I took that for granted.  Well; and this woman--"

"Is, beyond all compare, most beautiful!"

"Pshaw!  Sir Patrick, money-bags were more to thy purpose.  Is she
rich?"

"Yea--as a queen in charms."

"'Twere better in crowns for thee.  But who is she for whom I am to
act a proxy lover?"

"Lady Margaret, the Lord Drummond's younger daughter."  As Kyneff
said this, his keen grey eyes were fixed with an intense scrutiny on
the clear hazel eyes and open brow of the young prince, but nothing
could he detect, not even the slightest start; for although the hot
heart of the impulsive Rothesay vibrated at that dear name, so
admirably had he schooled himself to encounter the base plotters of
his father's court, that he betrayed not the smallest outward sign of
inward emotion; and with all his cunning, the traitor was completely
baffled.

"I have but little influence with that family, I assure you, Sir
Patrick Gray," replied the prince, with a smile; "and still less in
the quarter you indicate; yet such as I have is yours.  When shall I
address the Lord Drummond--now?"

"Nay, nay, not just now," said Kyneff, hurriedly, and confounded by
the prince's perfect facility; "but on another opportunity; and I beg
of your highness to accept of my profound gratitude."

"Doth this villain laugh at me, or hath he already divined our
secret?" thought the startled prince, as the conspirator withdrew to
the side of his friend and compatriot, the governor of the town and
castle of Stirling.

The great chamberlain now approached to lay several complaints before
the king, who by a power which had come down from those good old
patriarchal times when the Donalds and Constantines dispensed justice
from the mote-hills of Scone and Stirling, could yet hear the
complaints of the most humble of his subjects; but so crippled was
his power, that James III. was now approached in vain.  Then there
were no courts of session or justiciary.  Territorial jurisdiction
was vested in the barons and provosts of burghs, from whom the
appeals of vassals might be made to the sheriff, to the royal
justiciar, to the parliament, or the king--and from burgesses, in the
first instance, to the chamberlain-ayre and court of the four burghs;
but generally the people loved better to prefer their prayers to the
ear of an indulgent prince, who regarded them all as his children.
Thus, after Sir Andrew Wood had related that his embassy to Flanders
had proved futile in clearing up our quarrel with the sturdy citizens
of the Swyn, the Sluice, and the Dam, and that all trade with them
would still be interdicted, the loyal and venerable Duke of Montrose
said, in a most impressive manner,

"I grieve to say that complaints against the nobles have been pouring
in to your majesty, and everywhere the people murmur against their
oppression and misgovernment.  Here," he continued, consulting his
notes, "is a certain bondsman of the Lord Angus, who hath bought unto
himself a burgage in the royal burgh of Dumfries, and is consequently
a freeman, enjoying the liberty of that provostry; yet, without a
crime, he has been manacled and thrown into the dungeon of the castle
of Thrieve."

"What say you to this, my Lord Angus?" asked James.

"That I have hanged the frontless loon for complaining to his grace
the chamberlain," replied Angus, tightening the buckle of his gold
waist-belt.

Montrose and the king exchanged impatient glances.

"Another complaint hath been made against Sir James Shaw of Sauchie,
governor of your majesty's castle of Stirling, for seizing and
slaying several swine belonging to burgesses in the Braid Wynd; and
moreover, emptying eight byres and twelve henroosts in one night."

"This is only according to law, duke," replied Shaw; "for the king's
castellans may freely slay all swine that are found straying upon the
causeway; and may also exact kain thrice in the year: at Yule, Pasch,
and White Sunday."

"But not at Bartilday and Martin-mass too, Sir James," said the
chamberlain.

"Refer this to the judge of justiciary," said the king.

"'Tis long sincesyne, sirs," urged Shaw, doggedly; "besides, the
burgesses of Stirling have ever been contumacious villains, and
utterly unworthy of all belief."

"Lord Home hath seized the leper-house and hospitium of Soltra,"
continued the chamberlain, again glancing at his notes; "his friend,
the Lord Hailes, has stormed the knight of Ravelrig's castle, and
burned his three farm-towns.  The Steward of Menteith, with five
hundred redshanks, hath forced himself upon the burghers of
Auchterarder as provost, at the same time sacking them of armour,
furniture, and all manner of gear."

"Incited by ane auld witch carlin," replied the steward, a
grim-looking old man, who wore black armour and a kilt of blue and
purple tartan; "they ground their wheat wi' handquerns instead of
coming to my new milne on the Ruthven water, quhilk is contrairy to
the nineteenth chapter of the Statutes of Gild, and I swore that
carlins should weep, and bearded carles should dee for't.  Let them
appeal to the General Convention of Burghs at Edinburgh, if they
choose."

"Nay," said the king, in great anger; "let them rather appeal to
arms."

"Be it sae," said the savage old steward, with a laugh like a growl,
as he rattled his long two-handed cliobh on the floor; "what the deil
care I?  By a wave of my hand I could quench every fire between the
muir of Orchill and the kirk of Aberruthven, if they winna thole my
yoke."

"Upon Rood-day, in last harvest," resumed the chamberlain, "the
constable of Dundee cruelly slew, under solemn tryst, the laird of
Fetter-angus, at the glack of Newtyle."

"Wherefore?" demanded the king, starting from his seat with
irrepressible indignation.  And the constable replied--

"A year before he harried my lands in the Howe; but I have made
amends by paying an ample bludewit and by founding in the chapel of
St. Blaise the martyr of Armenia, here in the Thorter-row of your
majesty's burgh of Dundee, an altar, where the priest for the time
shall annually say for ever, until the day of doom, on the
anniversary of that unhappy hour, a solemn mass for the soul of the
umquhile laird; and on that altar lies the sword wherewith I slew
him."

"'Tis well, constable," said the king; "may some good spirit do as
much for thee.  What, Montrose, is not this catalogue of crime
exhausted?"

"The Heritable Forester of Drum," replied the Duke, closing his
notes, "hath seized a hundred head of swine belonging to the citizens
of Aberdeen."

"Because they declined to pay _pannage_, the usual duty levied upon
all porkers that feed on mast and beech-nuts in the royal woods,"
replied this baron, whose badge of office was a magnificent silver
bugle.

"By the holy kirk, thou art a faithful subject!" said the king,
scornfully.

"Something _must_ be done," resumed the Duke of Montrose, looking at
the group near Angus, "to repress this growing spirit of outrage, and
to bring the complaints of the people before parliament; or, as my
lord chancellor will agree with me, we cannot warrant peace among
them for three months longer."

"Montrose," said James, in a soft, but bitter voice; "wellawa!  I
remember the raid of Lauder Brig, and am now, as then, powerless."

"Lauder Brig," reiterated the remorseless Angus, who had caught the
words, and, whispering, turned to those around him; "by St. Bryde of
Douglas!  I was beginning to think thou hadst forgotten that day,
when we strung thy base mechanical favourites like a devil's rosary
over the Lauder stream."

Such were the peers of Scotland in the year of grace 1488.




CHAPTER XII.

EMBASSY OF THE SIEUR DE MONIPENNIE,

  "A grey-haired knight set up his heid,
    And crackit richt crousely:
  'Of Scotland's king I haud my house,
    He pays me meat and fee;
  And I will keep my guid auld house,
    While my house will keep me.'"
                          AULD MAITLAND.


While these accusations had been made by the lord chamberlain, and
proud replies given by the noblesse in question, Rothesay had drawn
near Margaret, and smilingly, and in whispers, related to her his
conversation with Sir Patrick Gray, and the suit which the knight had
requested him to urge.  She grew, if possible, paler at the relation,
for in her secret heart she feared that even were this new suit not
urged for some dark and ulterior object, it might afford her great
cause for uneasiness, and perhaps lead to the discovery of that
private union, which, as a deadly secret, she treasured in her timid
heart; for well she knew that the jealousy of the greater nobles at
such an honourable alliance formed a _second time_ with the House of
Drummond would fan the flame of "many a feud yet slumbering in its
ashes."

In the group near the Duchess of Montrose, Captain Barton was
conversing softly with her sister Euphemia; and poor Falconer, from
the foot of the hall (where a few of his soldiers supplied the place
of Lord Bothwell's guard, who were then at Stirling), glanced
anxiously at Sybilla from time to time, and sighed when reflecting
that all the gold _he_ possessed was on his spurs and doublet.  A
flourish of trumpets in the court-yard, and a glittering of
pike-heads and heralds' tabards between the festooned curtains which
shaded the lower end of the hall, announced the arrival of the new
French ambassador and his train, and then all became hushed, save
some such scraps of conversation as the following:--

"Sybilla Drummond," said the Duchess of Montrose, "remember ye aught
of the splendour in which the Lord Stuart d'Aubigne, Mareschal of
France, came here in 1483?"

"As ambassador of Charles VIII?"

"To renew the ancient league."

"Ah yes, madam; how could I forget it? My dear brother, who was
killed at Naples by Gonsalvo de Cordova, was captain in one of the
eighteen Scottish companies whom he took away with him to the Italian
wars."

"My puir nephew--he was indeed a brave gallant!" said the old
duchess, with a sigh.

"Yet, madam," resumed Sybilla, glancing through the painted window
near her, "I think the train of this Lord of Concressault every way
inferior to those of the Mareschal d'Aubigne and of the papal
ambassador, who came soon after from His Holiness Innocent VIII."

"In the following year--the Lord Bishop of Imola; I remember me,
child."

"He succeeded in procuring a three years' truce between King James
and Richard of England," said Barton, "who sent his despatches sewn
in the stomacher of Muriella Crawford."

"Ah, that woman became a Lindesay by marrying into our family," said
the haughty old duchess, applying her pomander ball to her nose.

* * * * *

"My Lord Drummond," said the swarthy Earl of Angus, glancing grimly
at the king, who was sitting with his forehead resting on his hand,
and buried in thought, while the Chancellor, Treasurer, Secretary of
State, and other richly dressed courtiers, hovered near him; "it
would seem as if we peers of Scotland had become mere grooms and
pages in the eyes of this king's new pimps and puppets."

"By the fiend, yes!  Only conceive again what we have just
heard--Hailes, Home, the Steward of Menteith, and the Forester of
Drum, being thus arraigned at the instance of a few wretched
burgesses!"

"Yea, and before some of those we spared at Lauder Brig--men who are
yet unhanged," added Angus, with one of his darkest scowls.

"There now, not a yard from the king's chair, is a balladeer, the son
of a sword-slipper in the Shoegaitt of Perth, who hath exchanged the
file and hammer for a sword and Parinese poniard--his canvas
gaberdine for a dainty doublet of cramosie, because, forsooth, he is
master of the king's music, and Margaret of Denmark loves to listen
to the twangle of his viols and ghitterns--faugh!"

"Men say he will be made a knight and privy councillor."

"If so," said Sauchie, "by God I shall forswear my spurs for ever!"

"I knew such another clown who was made an earl," said the Steward of
Menteith, who had given his tent-cord to hang Cochrane over Lauder
Bridge.

"There are Falconer and Barton, too, whose fathers were but
merchant-skippers!"

"But the former is a brave gallant, and the latter is my particular
friend," said Drummond.

"Well, well," resumed the discontented Angus, impatiently; "but think
of him whom I saved at Lauder, when _your_ tent-cord was twisted
round his neck--John Ramsay--a mere bonnet laird, who is now,
forsooth, _Sir_ John Ramsay, and Lord of Bothwell, Baron of Balmain,
Flaskie, and Pitnamore, with the Captainrie of the king's guard.
Yet, by St. Bryde, this springald dared but yesterday to pass me in
the Baxter's Wynd at Stirling--me, Archibald of Angus--with head
erect, and without beck, bow, nod, or recognition!"

"The brose these loons shall sup is thickening fast, lord earl," said
Drummond, with a dark smile, as he spread his silvered beard over his
steel gorget, "and ere long our lances will be at their throats."

At that moment the Montrose herald, an officer of the Lyon court, who
had been recently created in honour of the Crawford dukedom,
exclaimed, "Place for the ambassador of his Majesty, the King of
France!"

"Sweetheart!" whispered Rothesay, pressing his Margaret's trembling
hand, as all eyes were turned towards the entrance, "this is, indeed,
a critical day for us!  Should my father depart on his long-proposed
pilgrimage, I shall be regent, and he must grant us pardon ere he go.
If he stays, we shall then be condemned to linger on in secrecy, but
only a little longer."

"Until the good Bishop of Dunblane returns," said Margaret, with one
of her dearest smiles.

During the reign of James III. there were an unusual number of solemn
treaties and splendid embassies passed between the court of Scotland
and those of Louis XI. and Charles VIII. of France; Alphonso
_Africanus_ of Portugal, Ferdinand V. of Spain, Christian of Denmark,
and Charles _the warrior_, Count of Flanders, by means of nobles,
prelates, and heralds.  Some of these were exceedingly magnificent,
for under the care of kings who were far in advance of their times,
Scotland was rapidly rising in the scale of European nations.  But on
the present occasion the special envoy of Charles VIII. was attended
only by two esquires and two pages, who bore his helmet and
braque-mart, or short French sword.

The Sieur de Monipennie, Lord of Concressault, was a Scotsman, a
cadet of the family of Pitmilly, long naturalized by residence in
France, in the armies of which he had served lor thirty years.  He
commanded four thousand archers in the war between the Charolois and
the Lords of the League, and at the battle of Montleri had slain,
with his own hand, Pierre de Breze, the grand seneschal of Normandy.
At the left clasp of his cuirass dangled the gold cross of eight
points, worn by the chevaliers of the Order of St. Etienne, and the
Cross of the Immaculate Conception.  In aspect he was venerable and
soldierlike.  His armour was black, edged, studded, and engraved with
gold; his boots had those long toes or _poleines_, of which we may
read in the chronicles of Monstrelet; his beard was white as snow,
but his dark grey eyes were bright and keen; his features were severe
and somewhat harsh, but a smile of pleasure and loyalty overspread
them as he approached his native monarch, and, full of honest
enthusiasm, knelt down to kiss the hand of James, who immediately
raised him from the dais.

"The last time I had the happiness of seeing your majesty," paid he,
in a voice that was strongly tinged by a foreign accent, "was about
thirty years ago, and ye were then but a halfling laddie."

"At the funeral of my mother, of royal memory, in the collegiate kirk
of Edinburgh," said the king.

"I mind it weel, as if 'twere yesterday.  Woe is me! but the cares of
manhood have been written deeply on your majesty's brow sincesyne;
yet ye _do_ remind me of the king, your father, when I saw him last
in '58 at the Castle of Stirling.  He was ever a good friend to me
and to my house."

The eyes of the veteran suffused with emotion as the recollection of
years long passed came gushing back upon his warm and generous heart.

"I rejoice, indeed, to see you, my Lord of Concressault, and am all
impatience to hear the message of my cousin of France."

"It is simply concerning the proposition formerly made anent the
invasion of Brittany.  He has been pleased to desire me to urge your
majesty to invade and take possession of that dukedom, promising, at
the same time, to make over to the crown of Scotland all right and
interest France may have in its five bishoprics of Rennes, Nantes,
Saint Malo, Dol, and Saint Brieuc.  He would advise your majesty, as
more fully set forth in these papers which I shall have the honour of
laying before your council, to promise to the Bretons that their
states-general and all their ancient privileges shall be retained as
inviolate, subject, however, to the modifications of the Scottish
Parliament."

"What say you to this, my lords?" asked the king, as a murmur of
varying opinions rose among the nobles.

"I say nay," replied Angus; "the poor Bretons have never wronged us,
and by St. Bryde! why should we invade and dispossess their duke, to
please a King of France or to avenge his petty piques and jealousies?"

"The King of France requires no man to avenge his quarrels, Earl of
Angus," retorted the Scoto-French Lord of Concressault, turning
abruptly round.

"Drummond," said the king, "what sayst thou?"

"I agree with Angus," replied Lord Drummond.  "Why should we imitate
England of old, by waging wanton wars, and violating the rights of a
free people?"

"There are some fine harbours off the Breton coast," said Sir Andrew
Wood; "gadzooks, Robbie Barton, we know Nantes well, with its castle
at the mouth of the Sevre."

"King Charles desired me to say," continued Sieur de Monipennie,
without heeding the nobles, "that twenty thousand men will be
sufficient to reduce the Bretons, with such French forces as he would
send against them by the way of Maine and Anjou, together with all
the Scottish troops now in the service of France--to wit, Sir Robert
Patulloch's gard du corps Ecossaises; my thousand lances of
Concressault, and those of John of Darnley, the mareschal Stuart
d'Aubigne, who has just been created Comte d'Evereaux; and those
would enter by the way of Poitou, as these letters will show."

Whatever James thought of this splendid offer from the wily ministers
of his cousin Charles the Affable, who was then in his eighteenth
year, he had not time given him to say.  In 1473, the proposition had
been made before, and he had then intended to annex Brittany, at the
head of 6000 Scottish infantry; but the Parliament opposed it; and
now nearly with one unanimous voice, the nobles said, and perhaps
with some feeling of justice--

"Not a man of us will draw a sword or lift a lance in this cause!"

"The Bretons have never wronged us," added Lord Drummond; "and woe be
to those who wage an unjust war!"

"You forget, my lords, that the barons and burgesses are yet to be
consulted," replied the king, with rising anger; "and if _their_
voice is for the annexation of Brittany to our realm, by the Black
Rood of Scotland, I will march without my recreant nobles, or create
_new ones_ on the field!"

The peers on hearing this rash speech smiled at each other
contemptuously and incredulously, while the Lord of Concressault
gazed at them in astonishment; for though he knew well the stubborn
pride of his native chiefs, he had but recently come from France,
where he had seen the iron rule of Louis XI., his fortresses of
Loches and Montilz-les-Tours, with their trap-doors and gibbets, for
the proud and refractory; his atrocious bastille, with its vaulted
hall, and those cubes of masonry and iron which stood therein, and
were called the king's little daughters, and in the heart of which,
some men were pining and had pined for twenty years, like frogs in a
marble block!  He had seen all France tremble at the nod of the
decrepit little tyrant who espoused Margaret of Scotland--and now he
gazed with ill-concealed wonder at the effrontery of these Scottish
nobles.  And James, though his generous nature was ever averse to
injustice and oppression, merely to oppose, and if possible to
mortify them, seemed not indisposed to undertake the conquest and
annexation of this then independent dukedom, which was not united to
France until 1532.

"Immediately after the meeting of Parliament, before whom your papers
shall be laid, I will send to France my final answer," replied the
king; "and now, my Lord of Concressault, you can favour me in a very
particular manner.  You are, of course, aware, that since 1477, now
eleven years ago, I have been bound by a solemn vow to visit the
shrine of St. John, in the great Cathedral of Amiens."

The ambassador bowed; Rothesay pressed the hand of Margaret Drummond,
who hung upon his arm, and stepped forward a pace to listen.  A deep
stillness reigned in the crowded hall; even the nobles seemed to hold
their breaths for a time.

"On this pilgrimage I was to have gone, accompanied by a thousand
gentlemen; but the arrival of a legate from his Holiness Sixtus IV.,
the siege of Dunbar, the revolt of my brother, the Duke of Albany,
and those events which brought on the--the fatal raid at Lauder, with
many other events, have totally precluded the fulfilment of this most
holy pledge; I therefore entrust to you, my Lord of Concressault,
this holy medal, the gift of our Father Innocent VIII.," continued
James, taking from his neck a large and heavy gold medallion.  "This
I beseech you to present in my name to the shrine of St. John, as at
present I see no possibility of my leaving Scotland, even for the
short period of three months."

The Sieur de Monipennie knell to receive the consecrated medal, which
he kissed and suspended by its gold chain at his neck.  It bore an
image of the Virgin, and was encircled by the legend,--

Hail, Mary, Star of Heaven, and Mother of God!


This medal was afterwards conveyed to the Shrine of St. John at
Amiens, and there it hung until the plunder of the churches during
the French Revolution.

Rothesay gazed on Margaret tenderly, and in silence, for the king's
sudden and unexpected abandonment of his long-projected pilgrimage
removed, for the present, all hope of a fortunate or happy revelation
of their rash and secret union.  Rothesay sighed with disappointment,
and Margaret's timid eyes filled with tears; for had James actually
departed on this pilgrimage, the rules of the Church would have
compelled him to forgive all who had offended against him, or his
journey would have been deemed a false and futile pretence.

Distinguishing from among the nobles the stout and portly admiral,
whom he knew by the silver whistle which hung at his neck, the
venerable ambassador of Charles VIII. entered into an animated
conversation with Sir Andrew Wood, which was a fresh source of
irritation to some of the jealous peers, who thereby felt themselves
slighted.  The hum of voices again pervaded the large and stately
hall, and James, after exchanging a few words with the Duke of
Montrose, reclined his brow upon his hand, and with his face
overshadowed by a bitterness which he could not conceal, at the
affront so publicly given to him by the nobles, suddenly and abruptly
arose to withdraw.  Angus, who at times was not ungenerous, perceived
his deep emotion, and as the acknowledged leader of the peers,
approached and said in a low voice,--

"Your majesty may feel that we have wronged you; but I beseech you to
rest assured, that at heart your nobles love you."

"And hate all else who have a claim on my friendship," replied James,
bitterly, "or all who deserve my affection; is it not so, lord earl?"

"Yes, if bestowed upon the ignoble and unworthy," replied the earl,
haughtily, while his deep, dark, glassy eyes bestowed on his
sovereign one of those daring, fixed, and penetrating glances which
even he at times found almost insupportable.

"Yet would I hope, Angus, that with our great banquet in Castle of
Edinburgh--that friendly feast of which I have spoken so often--all
these feuds and bitternesses will cease," said James, as he bowed low
to Concressault, the ambassador, lower still to the ladies, and
retired, leaning on the arm of his most faithful friend and
counsellor, the Duke of Montrose.

"Poor king!" said the admiral to Barton, as they also departed;
"between his peers and his people, he is like one between the devil
and the deep sea."




CHAPTER XIII.

TO SEA!

  "All hands unmoor! proclaims a boisterous cry;
  All hands unmoor! the caverned rocks reply;
  Roused from repose, aloft the sailors swarm,
  And with their levers soon the windlass arm."
                            FALCONER'S _Shipwreck_, Canto i.


On leaving the hall, Sir Andrew Wood was received at the palace-gate
by his usual body-guard; the crew of his barge, under the command of
Cuddie, the coxswain, armed with their boat-stretchers, and clad in
their spotless white gaberdines, girdled by broad black belts, in
which each had his Scottish knife or dudgeon-dagger, and all wearing
broad blue bonnets, having red cherries on the top and white St.
Andrew's crosses in front.  They were sixteen of the smartest men in
the ship's company, and Cuddie--or Cuthbert--the coxswain, marched in
front.

As the admiral, thus escorted and accompanied by Falconer and Barton,
proceeded towards the landing-place down Tindall's Wynd, a narrow
thoroughfare, then paved by those round stones such as may yet be
seen in the streets of Arbroath and other seaport towns in Angus, he
perceived a seaman making various efforts to attract his attention,
by coming close to the barge's crew, and always touching his bonnet
with profound respect whenever his eye fell on him.

"Ahoy, brother!" said the admiral, "what cheer?  Do you wish to speak
with me?  Ha!  Jamie Gair--is it thee who art backing and filling
thus, as if I were some great lord?  Put on thy bonnet, man.  But why
art not away to the fishing-ground?  Are there English cruisers off
the coast?"

"Ye have guessed aright, Sir Andrew," replied Gair; "and I crave the
honour o' a word wi' ye apart."

"Well,--say forth."

"Captain Howard, the _Royal Harry_, and twa other English ships were
off the Firth last night."

"What dost thou tell me?"

"Sure as I am a living man, sir--inside the Inchcape bell," continued
Jamie, in a low anxious whisper.

"Lubber and loggerhead!  And thou only tellest me now!"

"Wi' the first blink o' dawn I was aboard the frigate, Sir Andrew,
but ye werena there; and I hae been haudin' off and an about the
palace door sincesyne, in the hope o' seeing you.  But oh, be wary,
Sir Andrew, and ask me nae mair, for I am but a puir fisherman, wi' a
wife and a bairn to feed and to cleed----"

"Wary--what mean ye, Jamie Gair?"

"Your word as a knight, Sir Andrew, that you will never repeat what
will assuredly be my ruin."

"Messmate, thou hast my word as a seaman.  Well?"

"Last night three gentlemen, in masks, went off to the _Royal Harry_,
and remained two hours aboard."

"About what time was this?"

"Mirk midnight----"

"When honest men are swinging in their hammocks.  Well?"

"When day broke, she and her twa consorts were bearing awa south and
by east."

"Three gentlemen, wearing masks,"--said the admiral, keenly
scrutinizing the honest brown visage of the fisherman; "ken ye their
names?"

"No, Sir Andrew," replied Jamie looking down, for he trembled for his
wife and child, if exposed to the vengeance of Gray of Kyneff.

"By every shrine in Largo kirk!" said the admiral, "I would give my
starboard fin to know who these villains were.  Ho!  Robert Barton, I
have news for thee," he added, with a grim smile; "the English
_Harry_ and her consorts are off the coast."

"Edmund Howard--he who with his brother slew my father in the Downs?"

"The same, my lad; and while we have been loitering in smooth water
among those gilded sharks of courtiers, they may have escaped us."

"Edmund Howard--oh, David Falconer, hearest thou that?" said Barton,
with fierce joy; "come admiral: if he escapes us now----"

"May we never go to sea without a foul wind, or come to anchor
without a rotten cable.  Away to your arms--to your cannon--the
English fleet is off the coast!"

"Bear away then, Cuddie--heave ahead, my lads! hurrah!"

cried Burton, waving his bonnet, and the whole of the barge's crew
ran down Tindall's Wynd brandishing their boat-stretchers, and
springing on board, shipped their oars.  Wood and Falconer leaped
into the sternsheets, and Barton grasped the tiller.

"Give way, my braw lads, give way!" exclaimed the admiral, as Cuddie
shoved the boat off; the sixteen oars were dipped into the water; the
crew bent to their task, and almost lifted the light shallop out of
the river, as they shot her round the Craig of St. Nicholas, where
the nautical loungers bestowed a farewell cheer in honour of old Sir
Andrew.  Jamie Gair was left in the middle of the Wynd, where he
stood for a time, irresolute and half repenting the interest he had
taken in affairs of State, and dreading that the gold he had earned
might bring him nought but sorrow.

"Give way, callants--give way!" continued the brave old Laird of
Largo; "see--the tide is ebbing, and there is a fine breeze blowing
down the Carse o' Gowrie!  Give way merrily, my hearts--pull with a
will!"

The old man was all impatience; the crew of the barge caught his
enthusiasm.  They bent to their slender oars with all their muscular
energy, and the light boat was shot over the waters of the Tay, which
parted before its bows, and curled under its counter, in the bright
sunshine, in long lines that were edged with bells of snowy foam.
Like an arrow, the long sharp boat sheered alongside the towering
frigate; the oars were unshipped from the rowlocks and piled along
the thwarts, while Cuddie the coxswain caught an eyebolt with his
boat-hook.  In three minutes, the admiral, his officers, and the crew
were all on board, and the boat was dangling like a toy from the
davits.

"Run up the signal for sea," said the admiral; "Master Wad, fire a
culverin to let Sir Alexander Mathieson know what we are about.
Boatswain, pipe away the yeomen of the windlass, and heave
short--cast loose the courses; trip the anchor, and prepare all for
sailing."

The greatest alacrity followed these rapid orders.  Archy of Anster
was as active as if the one-eyed demon of his extraordinary yarn was
after him: he hurried from poop to forecastle, growling, shouting,
swearing and piping away between decks.

"Willie Wad--quick wi' your gun!" he cried; "or we'll serve ye wi' a
stoup o' bilge in guid earnest."

The little blue flag, which, from time immemorial has been the signal
for sailing, was run up to the foremast-head, where it fluttered in
the wind; one of the starboard ports was triced up, and a great
cannon-royale sent its report like thunder over the calm still flow
of the shining river; and immediately a commotion was visible on
board the _Queen Margaret_.  The flag of Sir Alexander Mathieson was
displayed from her mainmast-head, and the shrill whistle of her
boatswain was heard, as he piped all hands on deck.

As to referring to either king or council, lord high chancellor or
secretary of state, for orders to put to sea, such an idea never
entered the head of stout Sir Andrew Wood; who sometimes was not
over-particular, for it is recorded that once during a private
quarrel with the Provost of Aberdeen, he sailed up the Don with the
king's ships, and bombarded the granite city in a fashion which its
citizens never forgot or forgave.

Falconer stood on the poop looking regretfully at the house of the
Drummonds, with its large round towers, which were then almost washed
by the river; but Barton was all life and animation; and with a
celerity astonishing for an age when every species of mechanism was
rude and in its infancy, the ships of war were got under way.  The
boatswain manned the windlass, and after a few hard tugs with the
handspikes, they tripped the anchor and turned

                    ----"The engine round,
  At every turn the clanging pauls resound;
  Uptorn reluctant from its oozy cave,
  The ponderous anchor rises o'er the wave."


Its square stock appeared above the surface of the water, and then
Barton seized his trumpet.

"Hard up with the helm, timoneer," he cried; "fill the head sails--on
board with the foretack! haul out the spanker and set the spritsail.
Forecastle there--cat and fish the anchor!"

"Quick, my lads!" added the boatswain; "yare, yare--mony hands mak
licht wark."

"Sheet home," said the admiral, stamping his feet as he walked up and
down the poop impatiently, and at every turn looked aloft; "sheet
home!  Barton, hoist the top-gallant sails!  Gadzooks, but it is a
brave breeze this!  Archy of Anster, send your sharpest man to the
crow's-nest as a look-out, and see that he kens a fleet of ships from
a flock of gulls.  By the whale of Jonas!  I will give a hundred
golden angels to the first man who discovers these English pirates!"

Cuddie the coxswain scampered up aloft, and perched himself in the
main-cross-trees.

As the great square mainsails of the frigates fell, they began to
feel the full pressure of their canvas, and gathered way; the
transient bustle subsided, and as the broad sails swelled out from
the yardheads, and the glassy river rippled beneath their sharp and
lofty prows, they stood noiselessly down the opening Tay with the
ebbing tide, and a western wind, right aft to bear them onward.

With evening a soft opal-coloured light stole over the summer sky.
The heat of the day had subsided, and a light breeze stole along the
water, wafting from the shores of that majestic river the rich
fragrance of the apple-bowers, the ripening grain, and the thousand
plants that flourish by its margin.

The great square tower of St. Mary, the pointed spire of St. Clement,
the Rock of St. Nicholas, and the little burgh--for it was then
indeed but a small but beautiful Dundee,--became shrouded in the haze
of the warm summer evening, as the frigates, keeping straight in the
fair way, rounded Tentsmuir-point, the sands of Abertay, and then
bore away a point or two towards the south, with the western wind
upon the quarter, when the sun's rays were fading behind the
undulating coast of Forgan, or, as it then was named, St. Fillan.

People supped early in those days; thus, an hour after sunset, the
bell in the great cabin announced that the evening meal was ready.

"By Heaven! admiral, I have an appetite for the first time since my
father's death!" said Barton, as he took his seat with a flushed brow.

"Gadzooks, Robbie, if Cuddie descries those Englishmen----"

"I will add two hundred angels to thine, admiral, and rig him a
crayer of his own--and she shall be the best that ever was launched
on the Forth or the Tay!"

Father Zuill, the chaplain, who sat on Wood's right hand, blessed the
viands, which consisted of a platter of fried garvies fresh from the
Tay, two great pies, one called a gibelotte, which the Scots had
adopted from their friends the French, and have now abbreviated into
_giblet_; and the other a tower of paste, containing all the odds and
ends the cook could collect in his larder.  This was designated a
double-decker.  There were pies of quinces and orange marmalade for
dessert, and cases of sack and canary for those who sat above the
salt; with a great leather jack of ale for Archy the boatswain,
Willie Wad the gunner, Cuddie the coxswain, the captains of the fore,
main, and mizentops, who sat below this line of demarcation, and who,
instead of supping off plate and a silk-edged table-cloth like the
officers, were bound to content them with a plain bare table and
wooden treen-plates, with horn-handled knives, and spoons.  The
conversation was general and animated, for it ran chiefly on the
merits and death of Sir Andrew Barton, the probable strength of the
enemy, and the chances of overhauling them.  When supper was over,
Sir Andrew desired all to fill their cans, for the toast which he
invariably gave every night, at the same hour and in the same place,
when on board, and had done so for the last thirty years.

"The gude Port o' Leith, messmates--God bless it, and a' our Scottish
ships at sea!"

When again they came on deck, the ships were off the Eden mouth, and
the waves of St. Andrew's stormy bay were rolling their crests away
to windward.  As the light breeze swept over them, they were tinted
with a thousand prismatic hues by the broad white summer moon, which
rose in her clearest beauty from the German Sea.  Falconer's thoughts
were then of Sybilla, whom he loved so well and perhaps so vainly;
and abandoning himself to the fondest reveries, he brooded deeply
over his passion amid the majestic silence of the sea that swept
around him, and the distant land, whose headlands jutted into that
shining mirror in bold but hazy outlines.

Barton loved Euphemia Drummond not a whit less than the captain of
arquebussiers loved her younger sister; but with the secure feeling
of a fiancé, for the present he dismissed her fair image from his
breast, and gave full play to those high hopes of fully avenging his
gallant father on the very men who had slain him, and whose ships he
knew were on those moonlit waters, which he was incessantly scanning
with eagerness and impatience, but with his unaided eyes alone: for
telescopes were not invented for nearly a hundred and twenty years
after.

The old admiral, who burned to punish the slayers of his venerable
friend and messmate, more than to avenge the temporary disgrace--if
disgrace it was--cast by the Howards upon the rising prowess of the
Scottish mariners, shared all the impatience of Barton, and together
they trod up and down the weather side of the poop, frequently
hailing Cuddie, who was still perched at the crosstree, to be assured
that he kept a proper look-out.

The night stole on; the moon began to sink; the frigates were still
going free with the wind upon the quarter; Fifeness, with the
dangerous Carr-rock, arose on the starboard-bow, and the old admiral,
who knew every part of the coast as well as the features of his own
face, now looked from time to time at the compasses which stood in
the lighted binnacle, or as the seamen then named it,
_habbitacle_--_i.e._, a small house, for there were two--one for the
steersman and another for the gunner who was conning.

The _Margaret_ was now a falcon-shot astern, and the great
poop-lantern of the _Yellow Frigate_ was lighted; but this precaution
was needless, as her cloud of snow-white canvas and all her taut
black rigging were as visible to her consort under the clear blue sky
of night as if at noonday.

"Fifeness in sight, and no sign of them yet!" muttered the Admiral;
"square the yards, Barton, and stand right away before the breeze."

The temporary bustle of this manoeuvre soon subsided; the rope-ends
were again coiled away, and, save the watch and some of the crew, who
were listening to another of the boatswain's incredible yarns in the
forecastle, all the ship's company had turned into their hammocks.
About the middle watch of the night, Barton, who was still
impatiently pacing the deck, heard the man (who for a time had
replaced the coxwain) at the masthead hailing the deck.

"Poop, ho!"

"Hallo," answered Barton, instinctively grasping his trumpet, which
lay on the binnacle; "are you aloft, Dalquhat?"

"Twa sail are in sicht, sir."

"Where away, my old Carle?"

"On the larboard bow."

"What are they like?"

"Ilk ane is a three-masted ship.  Ane has a poop lantern--the other
is hull doon; but we are coming up wi' them hand owre hand."

"Look hard, shipmate, and mayhap ye may see another," said Barton;
"Falconer, call the admiral.  Yeomen of the sheets and braces, to
your quarters; up with that fore-top-gallant-sail a bit, and fill the
heads of that sprit-sail-yard.  How does she steer, Wad?"

"Like a swan," replied the gunner; "a wee bairn micht keep her full
wi' a silken twine."

The admiral now came on deck, and with a beating heart the gallant
Barton sprang away aloft, to have a look at the vessels a-head, and
praying as he went, that they might prove to be those of Captain
Edmund Howard.

By this time the silver moon had waned, and the hills of Fife were
melting into the darkened sea and cold, blue, starlit sky astern.




CHAPTER XIV.

THE OGRE OF ANGUS.

  "I snuff up the smell of a corse from afar--
    Whither goest thou, wild steed?  Whither fliest, cavalier?
  Does the warrior seek for the pathway of war?
    Does the wild steed seek for pasture here?
  The wind of the desert here battles alone--
  None but serpents inhabit the wilderness stone--
  None but skeletons slumber upon the ground,
  And the vultures in solitude hover around."
                                _From the Polish of Mickiewics_.


The gun which was fired from the _Yellow Frigate_ before she sailed
from her moorings at Dundee attracted the attention of many in the
town, and among others Hew Borthwick, who, at a bench outside the
gate, had been teaching the constables men-at-arms, who loitered
about the king's lodging (as St. Margaret's Palace was sometimes
named), various tricks with cards and dice.  Hurrying down St.
Clement's Wynd with others, to the beach, he saw the frigate under
full sail, standing down the river.

"What the devil's i' the wind now?" was his first thought; "if Sir
Andrew encounters Howard on the high seas, our special plan will
assuredly be blown up like a soap-bubble!  Can Gair have suspected
us?  Impossible! the fellow knew nothing, save that we boarded a
ship--and what of that?  Well, well, let those laugh who win this
desperate game.  But it looks ill, yonder old grampus putting to sea
in such haste," he continued, after a pause; "I must een hie me to
Broughty, and see Sir Patrick."

In those days there were but two hostelries in Dundee, and as neither
of these had confidence enough in human virtue to entrust our
worshipful knight with a horse, he was obliged to depart on foot for
Broughty, passing out of the town by the shore instead of the Seagate
and market-place, for which he had a decided aversion; and, indeed,
wretch as he was, he could never pass through the latter without a
shudder, as it recalled certain passages in the history of his
family, with which we may now acquaint the reader.

In many ancient records, but chiefly that old and quaint chronicle of
Scotland written by Robert Lindesay, Laird of Pitscottie, we are
informed, that about thirty-eight years before the time of our story,
there was a strange being named Ewain Gavelrigg, who dwelt among the
Sidlaw hills in Angus, and who with his whole family was accused of
the strange and horrible crime of eating human flesh!

At the foot of the mountains, he occupied a small hut, walled with
turf and thatched with heather, at a place called Uach-dair Tir--now
_Auchtertyre_; but his chief haunt was that savage pass in the
Sidlaws, known as the Glack of Newtyle, where he waylaid, robbed, and
slew the solitary travellers who chanced to be benighted in that wild
and lonely district, which then lay between Dundee and Strathmore.
Several who had escaped him, and reached either the Castle of
Bailie-Craig, which was close by, or that of the Constable of Dundee,
related how they had been encountered by a man of frightful aspect
and vast stature, armed with a great mace and poniard.  All accounts
of him were similar.  He was entirely clad in homespun grey, with
rough deer-skin shoes and galligaskins; a broad belt of cowhide
encircled his waist, and his head, which was ever destitute of
bonnet, was protected by a forest of matted black hair.  A blow from
his clenched hand was sufficient to brain a mountain bull, or smite a
charger to the earth; and those who escaped from him, averred that
they saw him sucking the blood from the wounds of those he had slain,
and rending asunder their limbs like the branches of a withered bush,
while he picked their bones, as a marmoset might pick those of a
chicken.

In that age of credulity and marvel, such stories made a terrible
impression on the people.  The whole of Angus rang with them--and
others were constantly being added, each more startling than the
last.  The men of Strathmore, the light Lindesays, the vassals of
Glammis, and even the valiant Sutors of Forfar, never ventured abroad
alter night-fall, save in parties of three or four, and always well
armed with their quarter staves or two-handed swords.

Twice had men of undoubted valour and veracity averred that they had
slain him; one an arrow-maker of Dundee, by a wound he had given him
in the throat; another who was a sword-slipper of Banff, by a thrust
he had given him in the breast; but they were taunted as bootless
boasters, for this strange and uncouth being was still haunting the
pass of the Sidlaws.

A succession of these incredible stories excited the wonder and
kindled the chivalry of Sir James Scrimegeour of Dudhope, the young
constable of Dundee; and attended only by Lord Drummond--then Sir
John of that ilk--well mounted and in full armour, on St. John's
night in the year 1440, he rode to the Glack of Newtyle, and there,
like a paladin of old, blew three blasts with his bugle-horn.  The
night was unusually dark, and the broad sheet lightning was reddening
the sky behind the black peak of Kinpurnie, which is eleven-hundred
feet in height, and is the highest of the Sidlaw range.  The
narrow-bridle path which led through the Glack was buried in
obscurity, and clumps of stunted firs which grew in the morasses
waved mournfully in the wind that sang down the mountain pass and
through their wiry foliage.

With their chargers shod with felt, the knights rode softly on, and
as challenger, Scrimegeour, the royal standard-bearer, was a bowshot
in front of Sir John Drummond.

By the first blast of his bugle the erne was roused from its eyry
among the cliffs of Kinpurnie; by the second the warder at
Bailie-Craig was wakened from his sleep, and the hirsels lowed on the
hills; but the third had scarcely been tossed among the mountain
echoes by the wind, when between him and that midnight sky, which
every instant was reddened by the bright but silent lightning, the
valiant Scrimegeour saw a gigantic figure arise as if from the
ground, with its long hair waving wildly, while it brandished a mace,
which was furnished with a studded ball of steel, that swung at the
end of an iron chain.

"Ewain Gavelrigg--man or fiend--come on!" exclaimed the knight, and
though every pulse in his body for a moment stood still, he dashed
forward to the combat.

By one blow of this iron mace, which descended like a thunder-bolt,
the brains of the horse were dashed back into its rider's face, and
the rider himself hurled prostrate on the path.  Then the vampire or
demon of Uach-dair Tir strode over him, brandishing his tremendous
weapon, and uttering a succession of wild shouts of laughter.
Grasping by the throat the half-stunned constable of Dundee, and
compressing his gorget of steel as if it had been a lady's ruff of
lace, he would have slain him there but for the valour of his
companion, and a vow he had made to build a chapel in honour of St.
John, if he escaped.  Moreover, it is related, that he was almost
suffocated by the inconceivable odour that pervaded the body of his
herculean conqueror.  While the latter, exulting in his victory, and
laughing like a hyæna, was half strangling and half dragging the
discomfited Scrimegeour towards the pine woods, he neither heard nor
saw Drummond, who with his light Barbary courser, shod by soft felt,
advanced over the velvet sward that bordered the wayside, but
noiselessly, like the tall shadow of a man and horse.

The long sharp lance of Drummond was in the rest, and urged by the
full force of a galloping steed and the thrust of a powerful arm, the
head of steel and a yard of the tough ash pole, were driven through
the body of the midnight marauder, who expired with a frightful cry.

When day broke and the body of this strange man was examined, it was
found to be vast in its strength and proportion, but terrible in
aspect; and multiplied by a hundred-fold, the odour of dead carrion
pervaded it.  When stripped, it was found to have _four_ wounds, from
all of which the black blood had been freely flowing; viz: those
where Drummond's lance had pierced the back and breast, and those
inflicted by the barbed shaft of the arrow-maker, and the sword of
the dalmascar.

Two wild and haggard-looking women, his wife and daughter, came from
their hut at Uach-dair Tir, and as a boon begged to have the body for
interment, and as a refusal would have been deemed unknightly, it was
freely bestowed by the valiant Laird of Dudhope, who first hewed off
the hand which had grasped him by the throat, and nailed it on the
western gate of Dundee, where the skeleton fingers were to be seen in
the days of James IV.

In accordance with his vow, he endowed and dedicated a beautiful
little chapel to St. John the Evangelist, which he built at the
Sklait-hewchs, upon a rock near the burgh; but the walls of this fair
oratory had barely been raised three feet in height, when again the
travellers, who in that unruly age were hardy enough to traverse the
wilds between Dundee and Strathmore, were found murdered and
mutilated; children disappeared, desperate conflicts were fought and
pools of blood found in the Glack of Newtyle, and all Angus was
stricken with consternation by tidings that the wild man of the
Sidlaws had come alive again!

By sound of trumpet at the burgh crosses, Sir Alexander Livingstone,
of Calender, governor to the young King James I., proclaimed a
general crusade against him.  The hut at Uach-dair Tir was levelled
and destroyed, when, in a chamber, or vault below it, there were
found an incredible number of bones, which the credulity of the time
magnified to a perfect hecatomb of human remains.  Dudhope brought a
hundred lances on horseback, the Lindesays of Crawford and the Abbot
of Aberbrothwick a thousand each; the Laird of Bailie Craig brought a
band of gallant archers; a general hunt began; the whole country was
searched between Stenton Craig and Edzel Kirk, till, deep in a chasm
of the Sidlaw hills, the sleuth bratches of Dudhope discovered Ewain
Gavelrigg, who made a desperate and frantic resistance, slew eight
men and three horses--after threatening all the rest with dire
vengeance, even if he should be slain; but he was at last overborne
by blunted spears, for the knights wished to capture and not to slay
him; and for a charm each had tied to his lance's head a rosemary
branch, with a twig of the rowan tree.

Having but _one hand_ to fight with, he was soon bound hard and fast
by cords and chains, slung under a horse's belly, and thus conveyed
to Dundee, where he was sentenced by the Constable to be burned at
the market-cross, together with his wife, daughter, and son, a little
child, to make sure that none of a brood so terrible should ever come
alive again.

Jellon Borthwick, a prebend of Dunkeld, pled hard to have the child
delivered to him; and his boon was granted; but the others were
burned in succession: first Gavelrigg, then his wife, and next their
daughter, who was also accused, whether truly or falsely we know not,
of having eaten the flesh of many children.

"When she was coming to the place of execution," saith Robert
Lindesay in his Chronicle, "thair gathered an hudge multitud of
people, and especiallie of vomen, cursing her for being so unhappie
as to committ such damnable deidis; to whom she turned with an ireful
countenance, saying--

"'_Whairfoir chyde ye me, as if I had committed an unworthie act?
Give me credence and trow me, if ye had experience of eating of mens
and womens flesch, ye wald think it so delitious, that ye wald never
forbear it agane!_'

"So without any signe of repentance," concludes the historian, "this
vnhappie traitour deid in the sight of the people."

Her ashes, with those of her terrible parents, were scattered on the
waters of the Tay; and a black whin-stone in the causewayed
market-place long remained to indicate the spot where they perished.
Hew Borthwick was the child whom the priest saved: hence it was that
he shuddered to pass through the central street of Dundee.  The good
old prebend, who had given him his own name, reared him for the
Church, in the hope that through his piety and prayers the atrocious
lives of his parents might in some measure be atoned for; but Hew
broke his vows, and came forth into the world, to fulfil the terrible
mission for which fate seemed to destine him.

The people of Dundee and Angus knew not that he was the rescued child
of the terrible Ewain Gavelrigg, the ogre of the Sidlaws: for the
secret was known only to the prebends of Dunblane; and animated
either by pity for the wretch himself, or a sense of shame that their
holy cloister had once been desecrated by his presence, they locked
the secret in their own breasts,--unfortunately, we may add, for many
of the actors in our drama, and most unfortunately indeed for the
whole of Scotland, as the event proved.

An hour's walk along the rough and shingly beach brought Hew
Borthwick to the gates of Broughty, the strong walls of which, when
occupied by a gallant garrison, twice defied the Regent Arran with
eight pieces of cannon and eight thousand infantry.  The barbican,
with its flanking towers and strong curtain wall was then well
mounted by heavy culverins of yetlan iron, to sweep the river; but
the smaller guns, which faced the salt marshes on the north, and the
links of Moniefieth on the east, were composed of iron rings,
enclosing malleable iron bars.  Like other royal castles, it was
garrisoned by a company of the king's _Wageours_, as the people named
the enlisted soldiers of those military bands by which James III., at
a time when standing armies were unknown, with a foresight far in
advance of his age, provided for the security of the kingdom;
especially towards the frontier of England.

Thus, in addition to the troops in the five great fortresses of the
Lowlands, and to five hundred soldiers maintained in Berwick until
its loss and betrayal by the Duke of Albany, James, with consent of
his Parliament, made the Laird of Glengilt captain of a hundred
archers and lances, who kept the castles of Blackadder, Hume, and
Wedderburn; the Laird of Edmeston commanded as many royal archers and
lances in the castles of Cessford, Ormiston, and Edgerston; the Laird
of Cranston, a hundred lances and archers, in the Border Peels of
Jedburgh, Cocklaw, and Dolphinton; the Laird of Lamington had a
hundred troopers under his orders in Hermitage; the Laird of
Amisfield a hundred more in Castlemilk, Bellistower, and Annan.  In
Broughty, Kyneff had fifty archers, and fifty pikemen.  All these
troops, like the arquebussiers of the king's ships, were uniformly
clad; the horsemen in steel jacks, and the infantry in blue surcoats,
having St. Andrew's white cross upon the back and breast; under all
these captains were lieutenants, who received from the exchequer, as
the daily pay of their soldiers, eleven shillings and sixpence for
every spear and bow.  This organization was one of the many wise
measures taken by this good king to ensure the safety of his southern
frontier; but such a permanent force, however small, was eminently
obnoxious to the feudal nobles.

The sentinels at the gate of Broughty, who knew that Borthwick,
though a sorner and blackleg, was a dependent or follower of their
captain, admitted him at once, and he was conducted up a bare stone
staircase, through the large bleak and ill-furnished hall of the
great tower, to an apartment, which was hung with arras, that had
once displayed bright stripes of alternate crimson and gold, now
faded to rusty green and sombre brown.  A straw mat covered the stone
floor; the furniture consisted of a buffet, encumbered by flasks,
bowls, and drinking horns, swords, poniards, cards, chessmen, hawks'
hoods, dog-whips, and a hundred other et-cetera, covered by dust;
four clumsy armchairs, as many tripod stools, and an oak table, at
which Sir James Shaw and Sir Patrick Gray were drinking the cheap
Bordeaux wine which was then brought in by the Eastern Seas.

"Ho, ho! speak of the devil!"--said Gray, as Borthwick entered;
"welcome! thou art the very man we have been wishing for," he added,
kicking a stool towards him unceremoniously with his foot; "close the
door and drop the arras, for we have something to talk of that others
may not, must not, hear."

"The king's intended banquet to the nobles at Edinburgh?"

"Nay, nay; fill your horn first, my fine fellow," said Sir Patrick
Gray; "'tis a thirsty affair, a walk in the sunshine along yonder
sandy shore."

"Thanks, sir Captain--devil!  I am thirsty," replied Borthwick; so he
quaffed off a pot of wine; "I had not my purse at my girdle, and the
rascally hostler in the Seagate would trust me with nothing more than
a cup of cold water, and on that I lunched."

"So the Laird of Largo has sailed," said the Governor of Stirling,
knitting his brows inquiringly.

"I ken not on what errand, sirs."

"If yonder villain of a boatman hath proved false, we shall all have
to mount to ride, like Bordermen, when the spurs are on the platter
and the houghs i' the pot," said Gray.

At this surmise they all changed colour, and Shaw looked as yellow as
that English gold for which so many Scottish traitors were ever ready
to sell their services and their souls.

"Well, I care not," said Gray; "for every man in this tower, though
drawing the king's pay and drinking his ale, are mine own true men to
the backbone; vassals of my barony, who will fight only under the
banner that I choose to follow."

"I may say as much for his majesty's garrison in Stirling," said
Sauchie; "but I would that Angus and Drummond were come hither; for
now since this plebeian king of ours will neither march to fight in
Brittany, nor to pray at St. John of Amiens, we must e'en devise
other measures, or our pretty bubbles may be blown, if yonder old
sea-horse, with his devilish _Yellow Frigate_, encounter Howard on
the high seas."

"Then I trust in God that the Englishman may sink with all his
papers, for he can never capture Wood!" replied the Captain of
Broughty, with fervour.  "A startling affair it will be, if Sir
Andrew finds all the secrets contained in the iron-bound book of
Master Kraft, the London Attorney, and lays them before King James
and our enemies of the Privy Council."

"But our _Bond_ with Henry is in cipher."

"Those shaven monks and cunning clerks who write to James in Greek,
Hebrew, and other damnable languages, soon find a key to our ciphers,
believe me, Sir James."

"Then something must be done, for we know not what this night may
bring forth," said Shaw, refilling his wine cup; "where are Wood's
ships now?"

"Hull down, already," replied Borthwick, looking from a window which
faced the Firth of Tay, whose blue waters were beginning to redden in
the setting sun.

"By my soul!  I could have laughed outright at the gravity with which
Rothesay acceded to my proposal for the hand of Maggie Drummond,"
said Gray.

"What if she accept thee?" asked Sir James Shaw.

"Right well knew I there is but slender chance of that; but
Borthwick, have you examined all the avenues to this damosel's
chamber, so that we may have her by the time Howard returns?"

"By to-night I will have made sure, Sir Patrick; but if Howard is
slain or taken by Sir Andrew, what then?"

"We must devise other means," said Shaw, with one of his deep, fierce
glances; "by St. Andrew!  I would give three of my best tenements in
Stirling to have this suspense brought to an end."

"For one of those tenements,--yea, the smallest, Sir James," said
Borthwick, "I will write such a letter to Montrose as shall dethrone
the king."

"To Montrose----"

"Yea; but the letter must go to Angus."

"Doth the Lord Angus read?" asked Gray.

"A little; I saw him spelling over the legend on the castle gate."

"A letter!--and who will sign it?"

"I----"

"Thou!  Borthwick;--fellow, thou laughest at us!"

"Under favour, Sir James, I never was more in earnest in my life.  I
will write, and sign it with the king's signature, and seal it with
his seal, in such wise that not even he could detect the hand of a
forger; then how much less the half-lettered Angus?"

"With the king's seal, say you?"

"His private signet, which I found this morning at the gate of St.
Salvador's chapel, where the king must have dropped it, after mass."

"And this letter----"

"Will kindle a blaze through all Scotland."

"Art thou sure of this?" asked Shaw, with a grim joy that was blended
with incredulity and contempt.

"Let the deed show."

"Hew Borthwick," said the traitor Shaw, "I know thee to be subtle as
that serpent which of old beguiled our mother Eve.  I know thee to
love money, even as thine own soul, and I swear to thee by my part of
Paradise, that if thy boasted letter achieves the promised end, thou
shalt have, not one, but three of my best tenements in the Broad Wynd
of Stirling, held of the Burgh by an armed man's service."

"'Tis a bargain; and thou, Sir Patrick Gray, art witness," said
Borthwick, rising with joy beaming in his atrocious countenance.

"In that inner chamber are pens, parchment, and wax," said Gray;
"away to thy clerking, for here come the Lord Angus and his friends."

As Borthwick retired to compose one of the most villanous forgeries
ever made by a traitor's hand--unless we except the contents of that
silver casket so famous in the history of Mary, or some of the
letters of Secretary Stair,--a train of brilliant horsemen rode up
the ascent to Broughty, and dismounted in the paved barbican.




CHAPTER XV.

CONCLAVE OF MALCONTENTS.

  _Sir Penny_ owre all gets the gree,
  Both in burgh and citie,
    In castle and in tower;
  Withouten either spear or shield,
  He is the best by firth or field,
    And stalwartest in stowre.
                        _Money, an old Ballad._


Sir Patrick Gray and Sir James Shaw rose with much real and more
feigned respect, as the swarthy Earl of Angus, still clad as usual in
his armour, the statesman-like Lord Drummond, wearing a suit of black
velvet edged with corded gold, the Lords Hailes, Home, Stirling of
Keir, and the Hereditary Forester of Drum, all partially clad in buff
and steel, and the grim old Steward of Menteith, with his long
Highland cliob, and portentous beard that reached nearly to the top
of his kilt, entered the apartment, making a great clatter with their
long steel Rippon spurs, and those enormous swords, for the
manufacture of which the sword slippers of Banff bade fair to rival
those of Cologne and Toledo, and which were of such preposterous
length, that they were generally worn across the back, with the hilt
at the left shoulder, over which they were unsheathed when necessary.

Now, since James had declined his pilgrimage to Amiens, and Angus,
leader of the peers, was quite averse to the invasion of Brittany, to
destroy Montrose, Wood, and other favourites of the king, there
seemed to be no other resource but a general appeal to arms; and yet
the malcontent barons were perhaps loth to engage again in a project
so desperate.

"I ken o' nocht for us but an open raid and massacre o' the king's
garrisons, if they hauld aloof," said the stern Steward of Menteith.
"Those paid soldiers are but an insolent curb upon the auld and
inborn power of the nobles."

"Massacre!" reiterated Angus, with one of his dark smiles; "and what
then, Steward of Menteith?  The king can readily find new garrisons
and new favourites, who will again keep the power in their own hands,
to the exclusion of our interests."

"Then let us dethrone the king," growled the Forester of Drum.

"And crown young Rothesay in his stead, whether he will or not,"
added the Laird of Keir.

"I like not the project," said Drummond, who was the most politic and
least violent noble there; "_dethrone!_ it hath a new and strange
sound, sirs, to a Scottish ear."

"Dethrone--and why not, my lord?" asked Sir James Shaw, who was now
flushed with wine; "in our past history there are precedents enough
even for the most unscrupulous.  Without going back to that barbarous
age when Fergus II. restored the monarchy, have we not had
Constantine I., who was slain by a Lord of the Isles; and Ferquhard
I., who fell into the errors of the Pelagians, and for his contempt
of all holy rites was dethroned by his nobles, and cast into a
dungeon, where he died like a Roman of old; Malduin, who was
strangled by his queen; and the son of Findon, who was shot by an
arrow?  Had we not Ewen VIII., '_who was slain for having wicked
favourites,_' all of whom ended their lives on a gallows, around
which the people held jubilee as round a maypole?  And did not Eth,
Malcolm I., and Colin, all die at the behest of an insulted people?
And last of all, was there not Duncan II., whom the Earl of Mearn
slew by one stroke of his dagger?"

"The last you have named reigned four hundred years ago Sir James,"
replied Lord Drummond, coldly; "but I do hope in my heart, that the
measures which suited the thanes of the eleventh century and their
more barbarous predecessors, are altogether antagonistic to the
sentiments of the Scottish peers of James III."

A partial murmur of pretended assent responded to this reply, and
thus encouraged, the old lord continued--

"When I remember the love of this young king for me, and how he
placed a coronet on my head, I feel something of remorse when men
speak as thou, Sir James, hast spoken."

"My lord," retorted the fiery baron, "in this desperate game, the man
who feels remorse is lost!"

"Alas!  I fear me it is but too true."

"Remorse!" added Gray; "pshaw! 'tis but weakness of mind and
narrowness of soul!"

Lord Drummond made an impatient step forward, but Angus grasped his
arm.

"Knight of Kyneff," said he, with a reddening brow and quivering lip,
"I can afford to pardon this rashness of speech, which a younger man
and soldier would be compelled to resent.  I am an old man now, sirs,
but while this dear Scotland of ours required my sword, it was never
allowed to rest in its scabbard; and if it is for the good of the
people, whose natural head are the nobles, I will unsheath it against
a corrupt court, as readily as against our hereditary foemen of
England or elsewhere."

"In this hast thou spoken well; for by one grand stroke must this
corrupt court be swept away!" said the Earl of Angus, who as yet had
not spoken much, but in whose breast was concentrated all the pride
of feudal nobility, and the memory of a lofty ancestry, whose origin
was lost in the dark ages of Scottish antiquity, and whose military
glory was incorporated with the past history of the nation.  "My
lords and gentlemen, I will appeal to you, whether it is not an
intolerable thing that I, who am lieutenant-general of the kingdom,
must receive orders and edicts from this new-fangled Duke of
Montrose, whose ancestry were but Lairds of Crawford and Glenesk when
mine were Earls of Douglas and Lords supreme of Galloway?--men who,
since the days when Sholto the Swarthy won the Dale of Douglas by his
valour, have been foremost in every field that is honourable to
Scotland,--men who bore on their shields the red lion of the Galwegii
at the battles of Largs, Theba, and Northallerton, and whose war cry,
six hundred years ago, found a terrible echo in the ranks of the
Longobardi!  I will rather die, as many of them have died, on the red
field of battle, than stoop their honoured crest to this ignoble
yoke!  Aid me to drive these tawdry courtiers into England or the
sea, and I will make thee, Drummond, Great Chamberlain of Scotland."

"It would appear to me," said Sir James Shaw, who was blinking over
another pot of wine, "that thou, my Lord Hailes, art bettor fitted
for the office of treasurer than yonder old Saracen, Knollis, the
Prior of Rhodez."

"Yes, and we shall make his pood friend Home lord privy seal, in lieu
of that old foutre the Provost of Lincluden," added Sir Patrick Gray,
half in jest.

"Accept my thanks, sirs," replied Home; "but are there no pretty
places you could choose for yourselves?"

"Why, let me think," muttered Gray; "I have some old feuds in the
Howe of Angus--feuds which have been standing over since my father
fought Huntly at the battle of Brechin, on Ascension-day in '53, and
I would like for one month--only a month, sirs--to be judge of
justiciary, with a commission of fire and sword against all
malcontents."

"Right," hiccuped Shaw; "by St. Beelzebub! and thou shalt be clerk of
justiciary too, instead of that painted fop, Halket of Belfico, and I
shall be lord clerk register.  The Laird of Bailie-Craig hath a
pretty young wife and a cellar of pretty old wine; we shall
confiscate both, Sir Patrick--for he is a malcontent, and master of
the king's hounds."

During this, the Earl of Angus, who had been whispering aside with
the politic old chief of the Drummonds, now stepped forward with a
peculiar smile on his dark visage.  It almost amounted to drollery,
if such an expression ever lighted up that swarthy and stern, yet
handsome face, before which the sister of Henry VIII. of England
quailed when his bride at the altar, and knelt down in the dust at
the castle gate of Edinburgh, thirty-six years afterwards.

"My lords and gentlemen, I crave your attention," said he; "the Lord
Drummond, although steward of Strathearn and head of his house, does
not feel that his family is sufficiently powerful to take the field
formally against the court.  His coronet is somewhat newer than mine,
and consequently seems to him, perhaps, of greater value.  Thus he
proposes to strengthen himself by two alliances in marriage, through
which he calculates on having at least, for the security of himself
and his cause, six other castles, well furnished with men and
artillery, and four thousand border horse and Lothian spearmen.  His
three daughters are beautiful, and as we know, my lords, are
_peerless_ (in more ways than one).  He therefore proposes to make
you, my Lords of Home and Hailes, his sons-in-law, giving to each a
good slice of his arable land in bonnie Strathearn, and three of
Montrose's best farms in the glen of Kincardine.  Now, my lords, you
have a noble chance to win earls' coronets, with fair countesses to
share them. By St. Bryde of Kildara!" he added, turning to Stirling
of Keir, "were I not espoused to your dear daughter, Sir William, I
would lay my heart and sword at the feet of one of these beautiful
Drummonds."

There was a general, but very subdued titter at this proposal; Shaw
and Gray laughed so immoderately that Lord Drummond grew red with
anger, and tall Angus bent his formidable gaza inquiringly upon them.
The fierce old Steward of Strathearn stroked his white beard (which
seemed the exact counterpart of his Highland sporran), and adjusted
his belted plaid, with the air of a man who was about to say
something for himself if the younger suitors declined; though he had
already handfasted by force the fair daughter of a cock-laird in
Glenartney.  There was a momentary pause, for the two young Southland
peers were confounded by the sudden proposition, though such hastily
conceived alliances were by no means uncommon in those days, when the
Scottish nobles availed themselves of every means of strengthening
themselves for those sudden raids and revolts which were the ruin of
the national strength, and the terror of the rising middle-class.

"For my own part," said Hailes, hastening to break the silence, "I
beg to offer my most dutiful thanks to the Lord Drummond, and to say,
that I will consider it the task--or rather the pleasure--of my life
to love his fair daughter Sybilla, and if he will honour me with her
hand, two thousand of the best lances in Eastern Lothian will follow
his banner to death!  Alexander Home, what sayest thou?"

"All that you have said, I too am ready to perform--excepting that
instead of spearmen, I bring two thousand troopers from Tweedside and
the Merse, for I have long admired the Lady Euphemia Drummond, and
would soon have learned to love her, but feared she was betrothed to
the rich heir of Sir Andrew Barton."

"Robert Barton is a brave, good fellow," said Lord Drummond, "but a
stanch king's man."

"And the son of a merchant skipper," said Angus; "so it is your
bounden duty, Home, to save a noble lady from such a misalliance."

"I place myself at the complete disposal of her father," replied
Home, whom, like Hailes, the dazzling beauty of the proffered bride
had made completely tractable; "but what shall we say if each of
these fair dames assert a woman's right of choice?"

At this idea Lord Drummond laughed aloud, for that was a _right_
which was but ill defined in Scotland till the middle or nearly the
end of the last century.

"Wine--wine! more Rochelle and Bordeaux to drink to these fair brides
and facile bridegrooms!" cried the half-intoxicated Governor of
Stirling, as he thundered on the oaken table with a silver
drinking-pot.  "Gray, is thy devil of a butler deaf, or is the cellar
empty?"

"We have three butts of Rochelle, a bombarde of Bordeaux, and Lammas
ale enow to swim the _Yellow Frigate_," replied the chatelain; "but,
on my soul, Sir James, I think thou'st had enough before dinner."

"More wine, I tell thee, thou inhospitable!  Bring up the bombarde,
and I will teach thee an infallible thrust, by which thou wilt always
kill an adversary, even though girded in a triple coat of mail.  By
my faith, old Drummond, thou art a wise carle!  Take lords, while
thou canst get them;--better have eggs to-day than hens to-morrow.
Ha! ha!"

* * * * * *

Altogether unaware of the troubles in store for them, the three
daughters of Drummond at that very time were seated on the bartizan
of their ancient mansion in Dundee, watching the white sails of the
_Yellow Frigate_ and her consort, as they shone in the setting-sun,
and diminished on those waters which the western light tinged with a
golden glow.

With anxious eyes and saddened hearts, the dark-haired Euphemia and
hazel-eyed Sybilla gazed after them, for they knew not on what errand
the ships had sailed so hurriedly; and there they lingered long after
the summer sun had sunk beyond the beautiful Carse of Gowrie, and its
rays had faded from the green conical hill of Dundee, which was then
girded by the ruined ramparts of a castle, averred by history to have
been the habitation of Catanach, King of the Picts, and afterwards of
Donald I. of Scotland.

By their side sat Margaret, pale and thoughtful as usual, with little
Lizzie and Beatrix nestling by her side.  The ocean became a darker
blue, and blended with the sky; bells rang for vespers in the many
ecclesiastical buildings of the town, which then possessed four great
churches, five convents, and thirteen chapels; and reluctantly and
with silent anxiety the three fair girls withdrew from the proud
bartizan to the chamber of dais below.

By this time their politic--perhaps we are not wrong in saying
cunning--old father was leaving the tower of Broughty, accompanied by
his two intended sons-in-law, and two gentlemen, both Drummonds of
Strathearn, who were his constant attendants, and were constantly
armed to the teeth.  Borthwick, who had finished his letter, and was
loitering in the archway, beckoned to his lordship, and uncovering
his head with great respect, craved a word with him, for he had not
forgotten the punch he received on the head from the fiery young Duke
of Rothesay, and his heart yet burned to be revenged for it.

"Well, good fellow, what would you with me?" asked the noble, as he
checked his horse, for he was in excellent humour at the prospect of
two such powerful alliances for his daughters.

"I am one who has a sincere friendship for your lordship, and a
regard for the honour of your family," said Borthwick in a whisper;
"and I beg to warn you, that by watching well, there may be
discovered a certain masked man, wearing a scarlet mantle, who visits
your mansion under cloud of night--generally about the hour of
ten--and who enters a postern by the way of Fish-street."

The old lord glanced hastily at Home and Hailes, but fortunately they
were beyond earshot; so he turned sternly to Borthwick, and said,--

"Fellow, art sure of what thou tellest me?"

"Sure as I have now the honour of addressing you."

"A scarlet mantle, say you;--the Lord Lindesay wears one;--'tis like
his insolence.  Well, this eavesdropper shall die!  But who art thou?"

"A friend and follower of Sir Patrick Gray, who will vouch for my
veracity."

"A most worthy recommendation!" said the old lord, ironically; "but I
thank you, sir, and will watch, believe me.  This muffled man may
find it perilous work, and that he had better, as our motto hath it,
_gang warily_, or byde at home.  Carnock--Balloch!" he added to the
two gentlemen referred to, "come hither."

They cantered up to his side; and with all the ardour of vengeance,
Hew Borthwick watched their chief as he repeated the information just
received, and no doubt gave them the necessary instructions how to
waylay and discover this unknown interloper.

"So much for thee and thy blow," said he, with one of his hyæna
laughs; "and _this_ for thy simple father."

For a moment he contemplated his letter, which was written on the
coarse grey paper then coming into use, folded square, pierced at the
corners with blue ribbons, which were tied saltirewise, and sealed
with purple wax like a royal letter,--sealed, moreover, by the king's
own private signet, which Borthwick applied to this most infamous use.

The traitor gazed complacently at his handiwork, and then concealing
it under his scarlet mantle, he returned to the tapestried room,
where Kyneff was still drinking, and Sir James Shaw was now lying
prostrate on the matted floor, and completely intoxicated.




CHAPTER XVI.

ANOTHER SON-IN-LAW!

  But state-craft, mainly, was his pride and boast
    'The golden medium' was his guiding star,
  Which means 'Move on until you're uppermost,
    And then things can't be hotter than they are!'
  Brief in two rules, he summed the ends of man--
  _Keep all you have, and try for all you can!_
                                      KING ARTHUR.


Next day was Sunday, and, as usual in that age, the people of Dundee,
after mass, were shooting at the butts with arquebus and bow; for, by
the same act of the Scottish legislature which abolished the games of
football and golf, targets were ordained to be set up by the sheriffs
near every parish kirk, where, busked as archers, all the young men
repaired to shoot at least six arrows, each a clothyard long, under
fine of twopence; and thus in every town, however small, there was an
arrow-maker who drove a thriving trade, though firearms were rapidly
superseding the more ancient weapon, in the use of which the Lowland
Scots never equalled the English or the Highlanders.

The Duke of Rothesay, with Lord Lindesay and other young courtiers,
mingled with the burgesses, and took shot about in their turn among
the sailcloth-wabsters, bonnet-makers, and baxters at the butts; for
it was one of the greatest charms, and the leading wish of the Stuart
princes while in Scotland, to be considered a part of the people,
rather than as jewelled demi-gods enthroned on pedestals, and placed
above the lot of common humanity.  On this morning, it was remarked
that the young prince did not shoot as was his wont, that his arrows
fell wide of the mark; that he was abstracted, careless, and fretful;
for overnight a trooper had arrived from the captain of the king's
band in Annan, stating that there was a rumour of the old Bishop of
Dunblane having been wantonly seized on the high seas by Sir Stephen
Bull, an English captain, who had carried the reverend lord a
prisoner, with all his papers, to Henry VII., at London.

Tidings like these spread like wildfire among the people, aggravating
the angry bitterness occasioned by the assault on Barton's ships in
time of peace; the English faction, and those who, for their own
infamous ends, were anxious to further Rothesay's marriage with
Margaret Tudor, hung their heads; while the national party, whose
eyes were always turned towards the continent for royal alliances,
openly exulted, and expressed the utmost resentment at an insult
which yet required confirmation.

The first thought of the young prince was his Margaret, and of what
_her_ emotions would be; for on that kind bishop's return she had
garnered up the inmost hopes of her heart.  Oh! how he longed for
evening, and cursed the lagging hours!

Evening came at last, and then more sombre night.

Masked, muffled in his cloak, and armed with his sword and poniard,
Rothesay again left the little provincial palace of St. Margaret by
the private door, and proceeded to the house of Lord Drummond.  As he
traversed the dark and narrow Fish-street, he did not perceive three
watchers, who were also disguised, for they wore short black cloaks
and iron salades, which completely concealed their faces, having only
a horizontal slit for the eyes; they wore boots with felt soles, and
had long swords at their girdles.

These were Lord Drummond, and his clansmen Balloch and Carnock; none
of them recognised Rothesay, who, without perceiving the three
figures which glided after him like dark shadows, reached the
northern arcade of the old house, and by his master-key opened the
private door which led to the secret stair (the entrance and windings
of which Lord Drummond had hitherto supposed to be known to himself
only), and ascended straight to the bower of his mistress.  While his
heart swelled with rage and astonishment, the chief resolved to
discover the masker, and to probe the affair to the bottom.  He drew
his sword, and desiring his friends to keep sure watch in the street,
followed cautiously, but noiselessly, behind the young prince.

On that evening Lady Margaret had heard the rumour of the old
bishop's capture, and, with a heart that was full almost to bursting,
she sought the little oratory--every house had one in those days--to
pray and weep; but it was already occupied, for her sisters Lizzie
and Beatie, who had the special charge of the altar, were
industriously dusting the cushions, and preparing all for the
morrow's mass, after which they knelt down together, to pray and
invoke the protection of St. Margaret, with whom their ancestor,
Andreas Dromond, had come out of Hungary into Scotland.

"Pray for me, dear Lizzie," said Margaret, in a tremulous voice, as
she paused at the altar-rail.

"I pray for you all--my father, Euphemia, Beatie, and Sybie--" said
the little girl, in a whisper, as she tied up a bouquet of white
roses, "and for my new doll, when it is good, and for kind Robert
Barton, and Sir David Falconer, when they are on the sea.  Do I not,
sweet mother?" said the child, looking up at a beautiful white image
of the Madonna, which, with the infant Jesus in her arms, stood above
the altar, draped by a veil, and crowned by a circlet of gold.

"Oh, sister Lizzie," whispered Beatie, "is not that a dear, dear wee
baby?"

"How I should like to have just such a baby, for my doll fell and
broke its nose," responded the other; "if you had such a baby, would
you not love it, sister Maggie?"

Margaret thought of her little babe that slept in the secret alcove,
and her tears fell fast.

"Say one prayer especially for me, for indeed the wishes of such pure
souls as yours must be like unto those of angels," replied Margaret,
as she kissed her pretty little sisters on the forehead, and lest
they should perceive her tears, though the oak oratory was but dimly
lighted by a silver lamp suspended from the roof, she hurried away to
her own apartment, where she found Rothesay hanging over their
sleeping offspring, which lay within its curtained alcove, like a
waxen doll.

She threw herself into his arms, and gave vent to a long and
passionate fit of weeping; Rothesay did all in his power to console
her, and after a time succeeded.  Rousseau remarks, that to the woman
who loves truly, there is no _man_ in the world; for to her the
object is _more_, and every other less; and such was sweet Margaret's
love for Rothesay!

As they sat with their arms as closely entwined as their hearts,

"Dearest Maggie," said he, gazing tenderly and conscience-stricken
upon her pure and pale Madonna face, and with that expression of eye
that speaks of a love verging on idolatry, while he smoothed the
thick tresses of her rich soft hair, "dearest Maggie, I must end this
painful and unmanly secrecy, by avowing my passion, and our marriage,
to the people."

"Alas! then how shall I, a poor weak girl, withstand the power of two
ambitious kings?"

"Thou wrongest my good father, dear Margaret.  His heart is as free
from ambition as from guile!"

"But not from the cold policy that would wed you to a princess."

"I am not the first of our royal line who has wedded the daughter of
a baron."

"No--but from that I can gather but little hope," sighed Margaret.

"David II. married Margaret Logie, the daughter of a knight."

"Ah! and how fared she?  Repudiated by her husband when his love grew
cold--banished from his court, penniless and poor, she sought the
protection of Urban V. at Avignon, and died of a broken heart among
strangers; so that we know not where she, a queen of Scotland, found
a grave.  Better far, had she wedded in her own degree, to die
beloved, and sleep among her kindred in the old chapel of Rattray."

"But this was more than a hundred and thirty years ago; and since
that time Robert III. married Annabella Drummond, of your own family."

"Alas, again! was she happy?"

The prince was silent, and Margaret continued.

"Does not rumour say that she died at Inverkeithing of sorrow for the
misfortunes that had descended upon the grey hairs of her good
husband, and for the loss of her sons; and then there was Jane of
Somerset, who received into her body the same sword that pierced the
heart of her husband, James I.  If no better fate is in store for
your poor little Margaret than fell to the lot of those queenly
dames, better it were a thousand times, dear prince, that you had
never seen--had never loved her."

"But the king, my father, must and shall remember that love levels
all distinctions, and indeed knows of none," replied the prince,
impatiently; "thy love for me, Maggie, raises thee to my rank, and
mine for thee brings me down to thine, if indeed there is a
difference, for a lady by birth is the equal of a king!  But why
those sad misgivings? and why look back to Margaret of Logie, to
Euphemia of Ross, to Elizabeth Mure, to Jane, or Annabella, the
queens of barbarous times, when our kings wore shirts of mail, drank
out of pewter, and kept their courts in Scone or Rothesay.  Be
confident, little one, for I love thee with all the depth of a young
and honest heart--yea, Margaret, with all the strength of a burning
soul!  Thou shalt yet be Queen of Scotland, for if my father, or
others, drive me into this hateful English marriage, I will join with
the malcontent nobles, and when the cubs turn upon _the Lion_, woe to
Scotland then!"

The prince kissed her with ardour.  Then Margaret sprang to the
little alcove, and noiselessly lifting out the rosy cherub, which lay
with its tiny hands folded under its dimpled and double chin, she
placed it, still sleeping, in the arms of Rothesay, and knelt down at
his feet, yet half reclined upon his knee, to contemplate their
child, the dear idol of her affectionate heart--the pledge of her
pure virgin love--nursed as it had been born, in secrecy; the only
solace of many a lonely and many a bitter hour.  The young pair were
full of ecstasy, and oblivious of all but themselves and their
beautiful babe.  To them it was a reverie, a joyous waking dream!
How happy they were, with their bright young eyes bent over that
small plump sleeping face and rosebud chin, while the rich brown
locks of Rothesay mingled with Margaret's still darker curls, as with
all the expression of a Madonna she hung over her infant, with her
soft eyes full of tears, and joy, and holiness.

"If my father saw this beautiful child," said Margaret, "I am quite
sure he would forgive me."

"_He not over confident, Madam!_" said a stern voice behind them.

A faint cry rose to Margaret's lips, which, like her cheek, grew ashy
pale; and with one hand round the infant, and the other on his sword,
the bold prince sprang up, to be confronted by the tall dark figure
of Lord Drummond, leaning on his naked sword, which was at least five
feet long.  He was contemplating them with an expression of eye which
it would be difficult to determine or analyse.  He had overheard the
whole interview; astonishment had given place to indignation;
indignation to grief and anger; and these had in turn been supplanted
by gratified pride and ambition.

Shame crimsoned the cheeks and terror sealed the lips of poor
Margaret; while confusion, with something of anger at being
surprised, reddened the haughty brow of Rothesay, and for a moment
there was a painful silence on the lips of all.

"Your Grace of Rothesay has wronged me--deeply wronged me!" said the
old lord, with a terrible gravity of manner, as he struck his sword
into the floor.

"Had I words, my lord, to extenuate the offence I have committed
against you," replied the young prince modestly, as he cast down his
eyes, and clasped in his the hand of the kneeling Margaret, "I would
explain and apologize for my seeming misconduct; but at this moment
there is no coherence in my mind, and I only dread to rouse your
already too just indignation."

"And _thou_ too, Maggie!" said her father, reproachfully and with
bitterness; "it was very bad of thee to deceive me, for thou hast
ever been my favourite child, and none but the blessed God can know
how much I loved thee."  Then, raising his voice, he added
passionately, "By the Lord of heaven and earth, my daughter, prince,
must be the acknowledged Duchess of Rothesay, or I shall slay thee,
even as the Lord Athole slew thy grandsire James the First!"

Margaret's sweet pale face became convulsed by grief, and she wept
bitterly; but still her father's brow grew darker, and his eye rested
on the little babe in Rothesay's arms.

"Am I to understand that you have ignobly made a Highland wedding of
it, or been handfasted by some hedge priest or tramping pardoner, to
the foul dishonour of a house as yet unsullied by a stain?  Answer
me, Duke of Rothesay, for even were you heir to a thousand thrones
instead of only one, I would not have the honour of my daughter and
the honour of my name, trifled with even for a single hour."

"Alas, my lord," said Rothesay, "why do men, who, like yourself, are
no longer young, forget that they have ever been so?  I have loved
your daughter long, yea, since I saw her first attend my mother's
court in Stirling, a little demoiselle of the tabourette.  Your
lordship knows the hateful scheme of having an English wife for me,
and how in my cradle I was betrothed to the Princess Cecilia of
England, and thereafter to Henry Tudor's daughter.  My heart, my
afterlife and happiness, were bartered away like a useless isle or
frontier town by cunning ambassadors and cold diplomatists; but as I
grew older I revolted at such a state of tutelage, and in spurning
the future soon learned to love the gentlest of your daughters.  She
knew how I was circumstanced, but spare her, and spare me, the
recapitulation of all I said and did to procure the honour of her
hand; for in secret we were espoused, eighteen months ago, in the
cathedral of Dunblane, as its registers yet can testify--espoused by
Father Zuill, the admiral's chaplain, and with consent of my good
friend, the Lord Bishop Chisholm, for whose return from Rome with a
papal dispensation we have waited long and wearily.  And here, to all
unknown save to her nurse and me, Margaret bore and nursed this
babe--and oh, my lord, look gently on it, for it yet may wear the
crown of a hundred gallant kings."

"Prince, thou amazest me!" said the old lord, with a tone of
severity; "this secrecy--"

"Think over it, my dear good lord and father," resumed Rothesay with
energy, and in his most winning manner, for he felt that he was
advocating the cause of the shrinking Margaret, rather than his own.
"Had I openly espoused your daughter, taunted by the English faction,
a hundred ambitious nobles had felt themselves and their daughters
insulted; had I obtained the consent of Parliament for such a
marriage, then long ere the dispensation for our consanguinity
arrived from Home, by poison or otherwise the subtle Tudor had swept
our Margaret from his daughter's path; for alas! my lord, too well do
we know that ever since the wars of Bruce there hath existed among us
a faction of traitor Scots, each of whom for English gold would sell
his dearest brother into slavery, even as Joseph was sold by his
brethren--if by doing so place or pelf could be secured; _and this
evil spirit will never die_!  Reflect upon these things, my
lord--reflect upon them--pardon and advise us, for I am the son of
your king, and Margaret may yet be Queen of Scotland and the Isles."

Though Lord Drummond maintained an outward aspect of severity and
offended dignity, he was very far from feeling it in his heart, and
indeed was at no small pains to conceal the real gratification
afforded him by this discovery of a _third_ son-in-law, and by the
prospect that if this secret marriage was properly brought before the
king, the parliament, and country, his daughter would, in the first
place, be hailed as Duchess of Rothesay, and if she survived James
III., would assuredly be queen consort of the realm.  He saw the
rival house of Crawford eclipsed, his enemies in Strathearn crushed,
the house of Drummond placed on such a pedestal as it had not
occupied since the days of Robert III. and Queen Annabella, and the
golden shower of honours, titles, perquisites, and everything that
ambition could desire, descending upon his old and politic head.
Even Hailes and Home, with their earls' coronets in perspective,
dwindled down into mere nothingness before an alliance such as this;
and as for poor Robert Barton, he was no more thought of at that
moment than an old piece of ropeyarn!  Lord Drummond raised his
daughter and kissed her with great formality, upon which she threw
herself into his arms in a passion of gratitude and joy.

"Come to me, dear Maggie," said he; "I forgive thee; but secret as ye
kept this matter, be yet more secret now, I pray you, until the time
appointed for revealing all.  Ye have been standing, as it were, upon
a precipice, for royal alliances and a noble's honour are not to be
played with like gems or gawds; for men--even the wisest and
greatest--neither make nor mar them at pleasure.  Be secret still, I
implore you, keeping this unwary marriage from others, even as ye
have kept it from me.  The bishop has been seized, and Henry of
England, for purposes of his own, will destroy the dispensation; but
we will have a sharp war anent it, and then all hope for the English
match will die amid the crash of swords and lances, the boom of
cannon, and the flight of flanes.  But come, prince, the night waxes
apace; the morrow is a new day, when I must, in the first instance,
confer with the king your father, and in the second, have this little
babe--this poor wee imp of love, perchance of wrath--committed to
some of my surest vassals in Strathearn.  Come, Rothesay, come."

"Adieu, Maggie," said the prince, as he kissed her hand and retired
by the secret door; "adieu, my best, my first, and dearest hope!"

And as the Lord Drummond hurried him away, he saw poor Margaret, as
if overcome by the whole interview, sink down, pale, breathless, and
exhausted, into her _prie-dieu_, with her face buried in her hands.

He gave her an anxious and impassioned glance, the last he was fated
to bestow on Margaret Drummond for many a long and many an anxious
day.




CHAPTER XVII.

THE WARLOCK OF BALWEARIE.

  "The morning e'e saw mirth and glee,
    In the hoary feudal tower;
  Of bauld Sir Alan Mortimer,
    The Lord o' Aberdour.
  But dool was there, and mickle care,
    When the moon began to gleam,
  For elve and fay held jubilee,
    Beneath her siller beam."--VEDDER.


While these events wore occurring in bonnie Dundee, Sir Andrew Wood,
intent on avenging the fall of his friend, Sir Andrew Barton, but no
way dreaming that the fate of two affectionate hearts, perhaps the
fate of two rival kingdoms, depended on his severely overhauling the
ships of Edmund Howard, was cruising with his frigates on the German
Ocean.

The two ships, in pursuit of which we left the _Yellow Frigate_ and
her consort some pages back, proved to be only large three-masted
caravels, belonging to the Prior of Pittenweem, laden with wheat and
malt for Denmark; and when hailed through the trumpet, if they had
seen aught of three English ships, their skippers answered in the
negative.  This discovery proved a source of great satisfaction to
Cuddy the coxswain, who had feared that his messmate Dalquhat was
about to gain the promised reward.  He took his place again in the
main-cross-trees, and had not been there long before he reported
other two sails in sight on the starboard quarter.

Barton eagerly mounted into the mizen-top.  The upper sails of the
distant vessels were then visible, even to his unassisted eye, for
they shone white as snow in the light of the morning sun, which rose
in unclouded brilliance from the eastern sea; and the shore of Fife,
with the bold bluff Isle of May, were dimly mellowed in the morning
haze.

"How do they steer, Cuddie?" asked Captain Burton.

"Dead for Dunbar Harbour."

"Have they any colours flying, do'st think?"

"Nane, sir."

"One is a large three-masted ship, with her mainmast fidded at the
topcastle," said Barton, as he reached the deck; "her fore and mizen
are in one spar each, but with every rag of canvas set aloft; the
other is hull down yet, but I take her to be a small merchantman."

"It matters not," replied the admiral; "'bout ship and overhaul them."

The frigate was put about, a manoeuvre immediately followed by the
_Queen Margaret_, and both steered for the Isle of May: by this time
the two strange sails were placed upon the lee-bow.  The bustle
caused by this manoeuvre brought on deck Father Zuill, the ship's
chaplain, a grave but kind old man, whose brains were so much steeped
in abstruse study, lore, and scientific vagaries, as to be of little
use either to himself or others.  To defend him from the cool, fresh
air of the morning sea, he was well muffled in a coarse blue
over-coat, shaped like a cassock, with wide sleeves, and a cowl which
fell behind; on his head was a coarse blue bonnet.  A cord encircled
his waist, and thereat hung his cross and rosary, with a pocket-dial,
or perpetual almanack, of brass.  In one hand he had a pen, in the
other a little volume, bound in vellum and clasped with gold; he had
been studying it overnight, till his eyes became red and inflamed,
and he had applied himself to it immediately again, after morning
prayers.

It was one of this good man's crotchets to imagine that, by
discovering the true burning-glasses of the ancients, he would
supersede the use of cannon and gunpowder, and this idea being ever
uppermost in his head, he saw everything through its medium.

"If these should be English ships," said he, "have you no scruple,
Sir Andrew anent fighting on Sunday?"

"Scruple! gadzooks, no--the devil a bit!  There is no Sunday in
five-fathom water; and here, I believe, we have somewhere about
seventy by the line; besides, Father Zuill, bethink thee of the
saw--'the better day, the better deed.'  Barton, run out that
spanker-boom, and sheet home the foretopsail; keep all hands or deck."

These orders were obeyed in the time I have taken to write them.

"Hast thou heard, father," resumed the admiral, "that Vasco de Gama,
a certain valiant mariner of Portugal, hath sailed from the Rock of
Lisbon to reach India by weathering the Cape of Storms?"

"Yes--but he will never do it," replied the friar, emphatically.

"I fear me so, for the good Bartholomew Diaz--he who gave me this
Moorish poniard--tried it with two fair barks of fifty tons each,
four years ago, and failed completely."

"'Tis because of an evil spirit who dwells on the top of the
Table-Mountain," said the chaplain; "a spirit whose angry breath can
whelm the largest caravel in the ocean."

"Yea, father, the Storm Fiend," replied the admiral; "old Diaz told
me that he saw his shadowy form in the clouds, over hanging his
mainmast head, for many days."

"But De Gama hath received from his king a consecrated banner, having
in its centre the white cross of the Military Order of Christ; and,
moreover, he hath a letter to Prester John, of the Indies."

"Would that I were with him!" said Sir Andrew.

"By my faith, laird of Largo, thou art safer within a league of the
auld Isle of May," replied the chaplain, who was somewhat piqued by
the admiral's general unbelief in burning-glasses; "for I verily
believe that none can inhabit the torrid clime beyond Cape Non, which
lies in twenty-nine degrees north latitude."

"That maintopsail shivers, Barton," said Sir Andrew, stamping his
foot, as he gazed alternately aloft and at the yet distant ships,
which they were approaching by crossing their south-east course;
"this devilish breeze is failing us already."

"Would that I could give you the winds in a bag," said the chaplain,
"like the heathen, of whom we may read in this little book."

The admiral, who had no great love for the chaplain's books, which he
thought savoured overmuch of sorcery, glanced suspiciously at the
little tome, which was no other than "_The Boke of Eneydos_, made in
Latin by that noble Poete and grete Clerke, Vyrgyle, and newly
translated from the Frenche into Englishe"--a gift from James III, to
the chaplain, who continued,--

"Ers long, Sir Andrew, I may serve you in other ways, and now I have
a notable opportunity for experimenting."

"What, with thy devilish glasses again!" exclaimed the admiral, as
the chaplain descended the ladder and entered the door of the poop
without replying.

Almost immediately afterwards he reappeared, bearing in his arms a
machine which very closely resembled something between those now used
by a photographer and the theodolite of an engineer, for it consisted
of a little oaken box, containing a long brass tube, with a multitude
of little mirrors, screws, and glasses, Concave and convex, the whole
being propped on three legs triangularly, and forming their apex.
For want of a better name, this mysterious apparatus was christened
by the unlettered crew, "Father Zuill's hurdy-gurdy," and it was a
source of secret ridicule with some and of curiosity with others; for
whenever he was seen to level his lenses at distant objects, there
was a confident expectation that they would go off with a report like
a brass cannon.  The Romans used moveable types for stamping their
names upon cloth and vessels of clay; thus they were very near
discovering the whole art of printing.  Father Zuill used lenses, and
was quite as near discovering the telescope, yet no such idea ever
occurred to him.  Considering the whole affair as a mere whim-wham or
harmless foible, the admiral, Barton, Falconer, the boatswain, and
gunner, watched his operations, and made many a covert joke upon
them; but the crew, who had long since tired of experiments which
ended in nothing, were grouped forward watching the approaching
ships, or dozing away the hours on the sunny deck.

Father Zuill levelled his lenses and arranged his glasses in such a
way that the bright morning sun, then straight astern, shone lull
upon one end, while the other was pointed at the head-most ship,
which was now on the lee bow, and beating hard up against a head wind.

"Sir Alexander Mathieson will never sail ahead of us in a sunny day,
Father Zuill," said Falconer, laughing; "for he fears your operating
on his canvas, and burning holes in it;--what he calls your 'damnable
hurdy-gurdy.'"

"Now, Father Zuill, dost thou really believe in the power of these
bits of looking-glass?" asked the admiral; who, with an incredulous
smile on his honest face, and his hands thrust into the pockets of
his gaberdine, had been watching the futile attempts of the chaplain
to ignite the white canvas of the head-most ship.

"As truly as I believe that Archimedes burned the Roman fleet with
glasses at the siege of Syracuse!" retorted the chaplain.  "He used
concave mirrors; and if I could only construct a parabolic speculum,
the focus of which would reach three bowshots off, and burn there,
does it not indubitably follow, that by increasing the scale, I might
construct another which would consume a city at three leagues, and
scorch to death all who were in it?  Hear me, sirs.  If _one_ mirror
will light a spot one-fourth of its size, at a certain distance,
assuredly we may presume that the reflected light of a _hundred_
mirrors, all bearing on the same spot, will render the heat
unbearable, and bring the light to that refulgent point at which it
engendereth fire.  So sayeth Anthemius, who used hexagonal mirrors
surrounded by others; and so say Tzetzes, Zonaras, Lucian, and
others.  We read in ancient history, that the ships of Marcellus were
consumed to ashes at the distance of a bowshot, when the sun's rays
were at noon.  I have heard of as much being done by two concave
specula composed of polished brass.  A little study, admiral, would
make plain to thee (who use the cross-staff for striking the
meridian), the geometrical mode of discovering the rectilineal
propagation of heat and light, as it was understood by Eustathius and
Ptolemy.  Thou understandest me?"

"May I never more go to sea, if I do," replied the admiral,
scratching his beard in sore perplexity.  "I think all this sounds as
like sorcery as one ropeyarn seems like another.  No, no! the gunner
to his lintstock, the steersman to his helm, and the cook to the
foresheet.  Thou to thy book lear, and I to my seamanship.  By my
father's soul!  I would put more reliance in a good cannon-royale
with a smooth bore, and a calm sea under the counter, than in all the
glass hurdy-gurdies that ever were seen!"

By this time the _Yellow Frigate_ had the wind upon her beam, and she
was close upon the two vessels, which proved to be merely
merchant-traders of Blackness, whose crews had seen nothing of the
English ships in question; and the admiral was beginning to fear that
Jamie Gair had been mistaken, or that he had been sent on some false
errand, for purposes unknown.  His ships then stood close in shore,
and steered again for the Tay, under easy sail; and as they were near
the dangerous rock named the Carrwick, Master Wad, the gunner, took
the helm, and steered on the spire of the old Cistertian kirk at
Crail.

"I agree wi' the admiral, Sir David," said the boatswain to the
captain of the arquebussiers, as they leaned over the larboard
bulwark, gazing at the coast of Fife, which was then sparkling under
a brilliant noon-day sun; "and I believe there is mickie mair o'
sorcery than theology in Father Zuill's box o' glasses.  I never kent
o' man, wife, or bairn that throve under the influence o' sic fause
contrivances."

"Yet it may not be magic," replied Falconer; "for the same thing was
thought of our mariner's compass when it was invented.  For there are
many things in nature, Archy, which such simple fellows as thou and I
cannot comprehend."

"I ken this, Sir David," replied the boatswain, "that I never heard
o' a skipper buying a fair wind frae the witches o' Pittenweem or
Anster, but was laid bare on his beam-ends some day.  I would rather
hear the close-reefed foresail blawn to ribbons, and feel the saut
spray hissing owre my head, than resort to siccan contrivances; and I
could spin ye a yarn that would let ye see, Sir David, how puir
mortal men should just content them wi' whatever God is pleased to
gie."

"Spin away, then, boatswain; out with it, off the reel, while the
line will run."

"It was told me by my father, puir auld bodie, who is now keeping his
deid reckoning in the kirkyard o' Anster Easter, where he has been
aground these thirty years and mair.  Weel, sir, it was this:--

"In the days when the last King Alexander kept court at Scone, and
whiles in the auld Castell o' Crail, the ruins o' whilk ye may see
through the simmer mist on yonder hazy headland, auld Sir Michael
Scott, the warlock, byded at Balwearie, near the Linktoun o'
Kirkcaldy, where his great castle is yet to be seen; and where, on
the anniversary o' the night on whilk he was summoned awa frae earth,
as men say, the shadow o' a great hand, wi' a forefinger as lang as
the spritsail yard, appears on the wall; thrice in the moonshine it
beckons an unseen spirit awa; and when the bell at the Abbotsha'
tolls one, it vanishes.  Being a Fife man mysel, though frae the East
Neuk, I ken the place as well as the trout-holes o' the Dreel Burn.
I have seen the gate where, when Sir Michael stamped his foot, the
deevil came up in the form of a black Barbary courser, with a silver
bridle and saddle o' crommosie, the same on whilk he was carried to
Paris in one night, and whilk, by every stamp of its foot, made every
bell dance in the kirk of Notre Dame.  I ken the window, where, by a
wave o' his hand, Sir Michael raised the storm that rolled the German
Sea upon the Links o' Forgue in Aberdeenshire, and there they will
roll for ever; that tore the Lang Craig frae the Inch at Leith, and
swallowed up the boat wi' the dead body o' his mortal enemy, Sir Alan
Mortimer, when, at midnight, the monks, wi' tapers and torches
lighted, wi' censers smoking and choristers chaunting, were rowing
the funeral barge wi' muffled oars, frae the Castle o' Aberdour to
the Abbey of St. Colme; and there, where the yawning sea engulfed the
crusader's corpse, in its leaden coffin, cross-legged, with
sword-at-side and spur-on-heel, men to this day call the place the
_Mortimer's Deep_; and deep it is, I trow! for ye may pay out a
thousand fathoms of line, and never reach the bottom.  On that
awesome night, the Donjon o' Aberdour was rent frae cope to
ground-stane, and Sir Patrick Spens,

        "'The best sailor
  That ever sailed the sea,'

was weel nigh wrecked at St. Margaret's Hope; for his topsails were
blawn clean out o' the boltropes; and the Laird o' Hartshaw, as he
walked on the deck, was brained by a flap o' his mainsail.

"In these days, there was an auld fisherman, called Logan o' the
Weem, who served King Alexander wi' fish, when he byded at the Castle
of Crail.  Logan and his gudewife, Mysie, had ance seven sons, but
six o' them had perished off Elie, in that fearful storm after which
the herrings forsook the coast, and there wasna a fish to be had in
a' the fishing grounds between Kinghorn Craig and the Red Head o'
Angus.  The time of Lent was at hand, and then King Alexander, wi' a
great train o' lords and knights, auld Bruce, the pawkie Lord o'
Annandale, the Earls o' Mar and Buchan, true Sir Thomas the Rhymer,
and mony mair, were to keep the festival at Crail; and a helmetfu' o'
bannet-pieces were offered for a creelfu' o' fish.

"On the first day o' Lent, Logan o' the Weem, a dour and determined
auld carle, presented himsel at the Castle o' Balwearie, and begged
permission to see Sir Michael Scott; and, without muckle ceremony,
but wi' a beating heart, he was ushered into a wee dark chalmer, like
a coal-sloop's cabin, where, chin-deep amang great books, wi' a globe
on ae side o' him, and a stuffed monster on the other, Sir Michael,
a' dressed in sable taffeta, sat reading by the light of a lamp,
which threw nae shadow behind him, for the warlock knicht had _nane_.
Aboon his head, a blue star burned on the tapestried wall, and Logan
could scarcely keep his een off it, for it glinted and shone, as it
grew sma' and broad, and flashed and shrunk, by turns.

"Auld Michael's hair was white as the thistle-down, his beard
descended to his girdle, on whilk was graven a row of shining
letters.  His head was bald, but his eyen shone like two diamonds, or
like those o' the black cat and white owl that sat on the back o' his
chair, from whence the one spat and the other whistled like the de'il
in a gale o' wind, as Logan approached bauldly, but wi' his braid
bonnet in his hand.

"'Well, Carle Logan,' said the warlock, sternly, 'what seek ye here?'

"'Fish,' quo' Logan, trembling a wee.

"'Dog! dost thou take me for a fisher-loon?' asked the Knicht o'
Balwearie, wi' a terrible frown.

"'No,' said Logan, growing desperate; 'but I tak ye for a mischevious
auld warlock, that will ruin a' the fisher-touns o' Fife, by scaring
the herrings frae every firth and bay; and I've come to beg as a boon
that ye will tak the spell off the water, so that the herring draves
may again come back to Crail and St. Monan's.'

"'Sayst thou that I have layed a _spell_ upon the water?' Balwearie,
furiously.

"'I do--ever since the night when Mortimer's corpse was lost.'

"'Then I tell thee thou art a presumptuous liar, whom I shall yet see
hanging in hell by the tongue!' cried the warlock, rising, while the
cat flattened its ears, erected its back, and spat again; the owl
croaked, whistled, and ruffled its feathers, and the blue star on the
tapestry flashed wi' sparks o' fire; but Logan never flinched, for he
remembered that his gudewife, and the gudewives o' many, were
starving at hame.

"'Thou hast a son?' asked the warlock.

"'The last, Sir Michael, that you and the storm have left me--alake!
alake!'

"'Carle Logan, thou hast dared to do what never mortal man has done
before; thou hast bearded Michael Scott under his own roof-tree in
the Castle of Balwearie, and it is but fair that such insolent
courage should have its reward.  To-morrow, at midnight, commences
the Feast of St. Adrian, the martyr of the May, launch then your boat
alone, and cast your line in Mortimer's Deep, and thou wilt see what
will happen then.  Bid your son, at sunrise, drop his nets off the
Cave of St. Monan, and he will have in it such a strange haul as
never fisherman, since the days of the blessed St. Peter, brought out
of the great deep before!'

"On this the cat purred, the owl whistled, the star flashed fire, and
wi' a surly laugh the warlock received the thanks o' auld Logan, who
was right glad when he found himsel clear o' the great Castle o'
Balwearie, and hurrying alang the bright green links o' Kirkcaldy,
when the summer sun was setting behind the Lowmonds o' Fife.

"The morrow's midnight came; the Feast o' St. Adrian was held in a'
the fisher-touns o' Fife, and the priests o' Pittenweem were saying
solemn mass for the souls of him, of the Bishop Stalbrand, and of the
six thousand six hundred that perished wi' them when the heathen
Danes sacked all the Isle o' May and the towns o' the East Neuk.
Logan's gudewife, Mysie, as she lay alane in her warm box-bed at
Pittenweem, put up many a prayer to St. Adrian o' the May for her
puir auld fisherman, who had launched his boat alane, and sailed to
the Mortimer's Deep.  The night was calm and clear; her son was away
to the fishing-ground off St. Monan's Cave, and there he was to drop
his nets, as the warlock had said, at the uprising o' the sun.

"It was about the middle watch o' the night when Mysie dreamed that
she saw her gudeman's boat wi' its lugsail floating on the dark
waters o' Mortimer's Deep.  A bright moon shone on the Isle o' St.
Colme, and the abbey lights were glinting on the water; but the great
Castle of Aberdour, and its wooded beach, cast a gloomy shade on the
place where Logan's boat was drifting, and where the dead crusader
lay.  She saw him drop his line, and stoop owre the gunnel; then she
saw him bringing it in hand-owre-hand--for all in a dream passes
quick; he had caught something!  Was it a fine fish, for which the
chamberlain would gie a golden price at the Castell o' Crail?  Up it
came, slowly and heavily, and lo! a mailed hand arose from the water,
it grasped her husband by the throat, and dragged him down--down
beneath the sea--and the empty boat drifted awa' in the munelight,
with its lug-sail flapping in the wind.

"Wi' a shriek--a wild despairing cry in her ears, the fisherman's
wife awoke, and before her on the wall there glinted a _blue star_;
afar off she heard the splash o' water, a hissing, gurgling sound,
and the voice of her gudeman moaning as he drowned, _thirty_ miles
awa'.  The star faded, as the awesome sounds sank, and mirk darkness,
terror, dool, and silence fallowed! ....

"But I maun e'en be quick, or I'll hae to pipe the larboard watch
before my yarn's spun.

"The sun rose brightly frae the sea, and Mysie's son, when the first
blink o't glittered along the water, lowered his nets into the clear
green waves that danced off auld St. Monan's; the kirk windows, the
steep red-streets and rocky shore were a shining in the glowing
light.  Young Logan let his boat drift by the net for a wee while; at
last the floats began to bob and sink! ha! there was something heavy
in the net at last, and he dragged it in, thinking this braw haul
would be brave news for the auld couple at hame.  Hand-owre-hand he
brought the wet twine, floats, and bladder on board; and then he
could see something glittering in the net as slowly it rose to the
surface.  Up, up it came at last, and lo! there was not even a
codling in the net--but there was the dead body o' his puir auld
white-headed father!  And surely, never fisherman had such a haul
before.  Now, Sir David, what think ye o' that yarn o' sorcery and
devilry?"

"That, if true, boatswain, it is more wonderful than the story of the
Imp that strangled Gibbie o' Crail, for stealing his top-light."

"True! by my faith, Sir David, it is as true as that mermaids sing
when the wind rises, and drag doon drooning men."

The frigates continued their course, and keeping outside the Inch
Cape Bock, passed the broad estuary of the Tay about sunset.  Sir
Andrew then gave orders to keep them away "north and by east," and
still in search of the Englishmen, they stood along the coast as far
as the Red Head of Angus, favoured by the strong current, which there
runs alternately south-sou'-west and north-nor'-east.  In his
impatience he carried all the sail he could crowd, till the masts
strained, and he ordered the watch to heave the log every quarter of
an hour, to ascertain the ship's speed.

At this very time, and favoured by the same wind, the three vessels
of Captain Edmund Howard were boldly, and under cover of the
descending night, bearing straight for the mouth of the Tay, with
topgallant-sails set, a fair breeze, and a smooth sea.




CHAPTER XVIII.

FATHER AND SON.

  "Don Alfonso!  Don Alfonso!
    Thou art heir unto this throne;
  None thy right would wish to question,
    None thy sovereignty disown.
  But the people sore suspect thee,
    That by thee this crime was done."--The Cid.


Two days had elapsed since the prince's last visit to Margaret
Drummond, and her father's discovery of a union which, ambitious as
he was, had been altogether above his dearest hopes, and beyond his
most daring schemes: and true to his plan of having it regularly
announced to the nation by the voice of a new chancellor, when the
Parliament assembled in the capital, he did not breathe a syllable of
the important secret even to his most faithful friends or followers,
or to his daughters, Euphemia and Sybilla, who were sorely puzzled to
find that the two young Lords Home and Hailes were likely to become
constant visitors at their house; that in two days each of these
nobles had paid them four visits, and that beautiful hawks, with
scarlet hoods and silver bells, had been presented to them; that
elaborate little cases, containing gloves of Blois trimmed with
miniver and perfumed to excess, Turkish fans edged with swansdown,
and Cordovan slippers beautifully embroidered with gold and
seed-pearls, had come to them, they knew not from whence; and that
the sudden admiration and regard expressed by their father for these
two border lords was unbounded, while he seemed to be ever in the
best of humours with himself and with every one else; and guessing
wide of the truth, because such thoughts were farthest from their own
hearts, the timid girls believed and dreaded that this sudden and
unwonted friendship was but the sure forerunner of some desperate
raid against the courtiers of the king.

During these two days Rothesay, with Lord Lindesay, Sir Patrick Gray
of Kyneff, Sir William Stirling of Keir, and others, had been hunting
on Montrose's estates near the Braes of Angus; consequently, when he
returned, on the morning of the third day, he knew nothing of the
storm then gathering at court, where Lord Drummond had imparted to
the king the secret he had discovered.

Laying aside his hunting costume of green cloth, Rothesay was
equipped by his pages in his favourite gala dress, which was blue
velvet, slashed with cloth-of-gold, and tied by aiguilettes and three
hundred little trefoils of gold; for he had now resolved to pay
openly a visit to Lord Drummond's family.  The last point of his
elaborate costume had just been trussed, when John Ramsay, Lord of
Bothwell, the young captain of the Royal Guard, appeared, and said
that the king required his presence in his private cabinet.

With an unpleasant foreboding of what was to follow, and with a
beating heart and flushing brow, the young prince hurried to the
presence of his father, whom he found seated in a little wainscoted
room, the windows of which faced the sunlit Tay and the opposite
coast, where the rich corn-fields of Fife lay ripening and basking in
the noonday sun, and where the waving woods of Balmerino,
Monkquhannie, and the Peak of Craigsanquhar blended the golden grain
with emerald green.  The ceiling of this apartment was profusely
decorated with coats of arms and gaudy ornaments; the floor was of
oak, polished and varnished.  Books, globes, musical instruments,
hunting-whips, handsome swords and ivory bugles, were strewn about
the chairs and side tables; but the principal object was a grotesque
and venerable buffet, which had belonged (as tradition said) to Saint
Margaret, and thereon were placed six ancient silver goblets, which
had belonged to King Robert I.; and above them hung the shirt of mail
worn by him at the Battle of Bannockburn; seven valuable relics
treasured by James III. with peculiar care, and which, long after his
death, were preserved in the Castle of Edinburgh.

The king was clad in a plain dressing-gown of green silk, the open
breast and loose sleeves of which displayed his rich shirt, with its
diamond buttons; his vest and hose were of grey velvet, and his boots
of soft white leather, with scarlet heels.  A great ruby ring was on
one of his fingers, and Father Zuill's pedantic _Treatise on
Burning-glasses_ lay open beside him.

By the aspect of severity which clouded the usually open and kind
face of his father, Rothesay perceived in a moment that his secret
was known to him.  Reclining back in his arm-chair, with a hand
resting on each of the carved arms, James III. gazed with calm but
stern eyes on the young prince, and said.--

"Shame on thee, Rothesay, for thou hast deceived me, who have ever
trusted and yet love thee so well!  But worse than that, thou hast
deceived the people thou mayst one day govern.  Alas! the Lord
Drummond has told me all."

"I did indeed deceive you--but how was I to act?  The intrigues of
England, my successive betrothal to two princesses of that nation, my
relationship to Margaret Drummond through our ancestress Queen
Annabella, and the necessity for a public dispensation, must all
plead my excuse for her; for myself I make none; upbraid me as you
may, I feel that I deserve reproach for deceiving those who loved me,
but not more than Margaret Drummond."

Rothesay gathered a courage, as it were, from desperation; and aware
how much the happiness of the future depended on the effect produced
at this first interview on the subject, he endeavoured to rally all
his presence of mind.

"This John Drummond," said the king, bitterly, "when only Laird of
Stobhall and that ilk, was a good man and true; but in the same evil
hour when I created John Hay, Lord of Zester, Robert Crichton, Lord
of Sauquhar, and John de Carlyle, Lord of Torthorwald, I placed a
coronet on his head, and immediately his heart became infected by the
ambition, corruption, and falsehood which make the peers of Scotland
a curse to the nation and to us.  I could read the inmost thoughts of
that old man's hollow heart, when smiling he stood before me, and
told how the crown prince of Scotland had in secret wedded his
daughter; and while affecting to reprehend such secrecy and
disobedience in proper terms of severity, he could but ill conceal
the joy with which he contemplated a second daughter of his house
sharing the honours of an imperial crown."

"The Lord Drummond," urged the prince, "is the most faithful of your
majesty's subjects, and his forefathers have all been true to their
country; one fought by Bruce's side at Bannockburn, and destroyed the
English horse by the Calthrops, with which he strewed the field;
another was slain at the battle of Durham; a third took Piercy
prisoner at Otterburn; and the present lord is a venerable and
upright noble."

"Do not deceive yourself," replied James, still more bitterly; "grey
hairs do not indicate a wise head or honest heart, any more than
bright armour indicates a valiant soldier; besides, I ever think
meanly of him whose sole merits are based on those of a dead
ancestry.  Drummond will prove true to the innate principles of that
high-born but hollow-hearted class who are at all times ready to
betray their country.  But listen to me, Rothesay," continued James
impressively, "the public duty and the common weal, your own honour
and justice to the nation, to say nothing of simple prudence, require
that you must conquer this most unfortunate attachment, and repudiate
this irregular marriage, which the Church can and _shall_ dissolve;
till when, I require you to see no more the too willing and too
artful daughter of this ambitious and designing lord."

Rothesay was thunderstruck by these words.  "This severity will
distract me!" said he, clasping his hands,--for he loved and revered
his royal father with a love and reverence that were never surpassed;
"my dearest--my unfortunate Margaret!  Thou too willing--thou too
artful?  Alas, you know her not!  A sweeter nature, a fonder heart, a
purer or a nobler love than hers, never warmed a human breast!  It is
I who have been criminal.  It is I who have been false, artful, and
beguiling; and most justly to me she looks for reparation,
vindication, and redress.  She is my wife--wedded in the Cathedral of
Dunblane--wedded solemnly before God and man, and is Margaret Duchess
of Rothesay, Countess of Carrick, and Lady of Renfrew."

"Prince! prince!" urged the gentle king, overcome by the fiery energy
of his son, "remember that these Drummonds are only Barons of
Stobhall."

"Father," retorted the proud young prince, "do you forget that we
Stuarts were _once_ but thanes of Strathyryffe?"

"I do not," said the king, rising; "and by that proud memory command
you to renounce this woman!"

"Impossible! mortal man may not now put us asunder."

James III. grew pale with anger.

"If, like King Duncan, thou hadst openly wedded the miller of
Forteviot's daughter, I could have forgiven it; but the secrecy, the
deceit of thee, and of this Lord Drummond, whose friend and
benefactor I have been, sting me to the soul.  He has but wiled and
intrigued with thee, that his daughter may be a queen, and I
dethroned, even perhaps before my wretched days are numbered.  Now my
own son conspires against me!" added the king, wildly, as he covered
his face with his hands; "for I have fallen on evil times.  Ah! woe
is me!"

"I beseech your majesty to pardon me!" said Rothesay, who was crushed
for a moment by the grief and bitterness of his father.

"Promise me, first, the renunciation of this artful woman!" said the
king, looking up, imploringly.

"Rather than conceive a thought so base, I will take my sword, and,
renouncing the Scottish crown in favour of my little brother the Duke
of Ross, or even of the exiled son of my uncle Albany and Anne of
Auvergne, I will enter the service of Charles VIII. to fight against
the Breton lords, or of Ferdinand the Catholic, to fight the Spanish
Moors; I will go wherever my sword can find me bread, and leave this
land for ever!"

James III. grew pale again, for he knew well the rashness of which
Rothesay was capable.

"Another menace such as this," said he, snatching up a silver whistle
which lay on the table, "and I will send thee under guard to the
Tower of Lochmaben or the Castle of Inverlochie.  Inconsiderate boy,
this rash espousal is every way illegal, for ye are both related
within the third and forbidden degree of blood!"

"The Lord Bishop of Dunblane----"

"He has been captured on the seas by English pirates."

"Alas!  I know, but he was bringing our dispensation from Rome."

"Ho! what is this thou tellest me?  A dispensation!  Could Henry VII.
know of it?  Impossible; yet why seize the poor bishop and destroy
his papers."  James bit his lip, and, smiling disdainfully, added,
"This wily Tudor toils hard to have his daughter wedded to a
Stuart--but Barton's bones are yet unburied, and his kinsmen will yet
avenge his death.  But do, dear Rothesay, pause, for it seems that
this frantic love hath bewitched thee."

"I have no reason to blush for it.  Have not the bravest soldiers,
the wisest philosophers--yea, the most virtuous saints--been
vanquished by its power?  Think over it calmly, my dearest king and
father, and say, wouldst thou have me to deceive one who has trusted
to me, and whose love for me is not second even to thine."

"No, on my soul, I would not have thee to deceive her; but oh,
Rothesay, I would rather have lost ten lowland earldoms than the hope
of such an alliance for thee as Charles VIII. of France or Catharine
of Navarre could have offered, if this one with England failed.  But
leave me now," added the good and indulgent king; "a time may come
when I shall forgive you, but not just now."

The young prince's heart danced with joy; tears started into his fine
hazel eyes, as, with a burst of affection, he kissed the proffered
hand of his father, and hurried away to visit Lord Drummond's house,
while James prepared for that daily council or levee which was one of
the tasks our sovereigns had to undergo during their annual
progresses through the kingdom.

Leaving the Palace of St. Margaret by the principal entrance in the
Nethergaitt, the happy prince, without any followers or attendants,
hurried along the crowded and sunny street, and turned to the right,
down the quaint old wynd of St. Clement, where he was suddenly met by
Lord Drummond, who was coming up hurriedly, and followed by his
constant attendants the Lairds of Carnock and Balloch.

"Your servant, my dear lord," said Rothesay, uncovering; "you are
abroad betimes this morning."

"Prince, thou hast wronged and deceived me most foully!" said the
stern noble, in a voice rendered hoarse by passion, as he unsheathed
his long sword; "I am an old man, but beware, for not even a prince
of the blood shall insult me.  My daughter Margaret--where is she?"

"Where?" reiterated the prince, with confusion and alarm,

"Yea, where--speak, speak!"

"Is she not at home with you, my lord?"

"With me--no!  All last night her chamber has been vacant, her bed
unslept in; the window of her turret was found open; the tables
overturned, the hangings torn; her babe half dead by cold; a rope
ladder dangling--yea, it dangles yet--from the window that faces
Fish-street.  My daughter is gone, none know whither, and her poor
babe mourns and whines for her in vain.  Prince, by this abduction
thou hast doubly disgraced and insulted me.  Say, where is my
daughter--this best beloved of five?--say, say, lest my too just
indignation turn this sword against thee--prince royal though ye be!"

"My lord," said the prince, clasping his hands, "I swear by all my
hope in Heaven's mercy, by that blessed altar before which I received
her hand, and where I gave my solemn troth, that I know not where she
is; but will spend the last drop of my blood to discover and to save
her."

"Go to!" said the enraged father, hoarsely; "dost think I will
believe all this?  'Sdeath, he who deceives me once may readily do so
again.  But I will have vengeance sure for it.  Every man in
Strathearne shall be in his helmet ere the morrow's sun sets, and I
will nail my gauntlet on your father's palace-gate, in token of what
a Scottish peer may do."

On hearing this threat, the two Drummonds, who shared all the
indignation of their chief, twisted their shaggy mustachios, and
played with the hilts of their long iron-hilted swords, in their
fiery impatience.

"I am as little accustomed to deceive, my lord, as I am to be
disbelieved or misunderstood," replied the prince; "and again I swear
to you, by all we hold most sacred, that I have spoken to the verity,
and the verity alone.  My Margaret----"

"Behold the only trace of her," said Lord Drummond, as he roughly
grasped Rothesay's hand, and drew him a few paces down the wynd, to
where they could see the north-east tower of his mansion.  There
Rothesay's eye first caught sight of Margaret's well-known window.
It was open: the fragments of a rope-ladder were yet streaming out
upon the wind, and various passengers were grouped in the street
below, conferring and surmising, with upturned faces, on what had
happened there overnight.  On beholding these ocular proofs of some
terrible catastrophe, the prince lost alike his patience and presence
of mind.  He unsheathed his sword, and exclaimed,

"We have been discovered and betrayed!"

"Thank God, this emotion seems genuine!" said Drummond, as he leaned
on his long weapon, and grimly scrutinized the prince; "betrayed,
sayst thou? but by whom, dost thou think?"

"By some of my father's favourites."

"Right! by the hand of St. Fillan, I thought these varlets had
something to do with this outrage.  Can the king know it, think ye?"
asked Drummond, with a terrible glare in his eyes, as he turned to
his kinsmen, Balloch and Carnock, who both drew their swords, as if
by instinctive use and wont.

"Alas, I said not _that_," replied Rothesay, giving way to tears;
"but my mind is a chaos--I can no longer think."

"'Sblood--act, then!"

"How now, my lord--your highness--gentlemen, what is astir?" asked
Sir Patrick Gray, stepping out of a daggermaker's shop at that
moment; "beware, sirs--and up with your swords; remember that it is
an act of treason to draw within four miles of the king or the lord
high constable, and both are now in our burgh of bonnie Dundee."

"Damn the constable, and the burgh of Dundee to boot!  My daughter
Margaret has been carried off by violence; there hath been hership
and hamesücken overnight, Sir Patrick, and as a knight and gentleman,
and moreover as the king's good soldier, I claim your assistance."

"Carried off!--the beautiful Margaret!" exclaimed Gray, with
well-feigned astonishment; "by St. Mirran! there hath been foul play,
then; for alas, my lord, as last night I rode along the beach to
Broughty, I heard shrill cries, as from a woman on the water."

"Kyrie Eleison!" ejaculated the prince, trembling, and growing paler
than death, at the terrible thoughts this information suggested, and
he wept aloud.

"Some of James's courtly minions----" began Gray.

"Have been at work here," interrupted Lord Drummond, passionately;
"thinkest thou so, too?  Then the king shall do me justice, or this
right hand, which has so often fenced his father's throne, shall be
the first to thrust a lighted torch under it now.  Come with me,
sirs," he added, hurling his long sword into its sheath of crimson
velvet; "come with me, the king is now in council."

As they hurried up the wynd, taking the bewildered Rothesay with
them, they heard the clatter of many hoofs, and saw the Earl of
Angus, sheathed in complete armour, and attended by not less than
five hundred spearmen on horseback, all heavily accoutred, pass at a
hard gallop along the Nethergaitt, towards the king's residence.

"Now, what may this portend?" asked Carnock and Ballock together,
with surprise.

"Heaven only knows," said Gray, laughing under his thick beard; "but
the Douglasses never mount without good cause, be assured, sirs.  How
this plot thickens," thought he, as he looked towards the dim blue
sea; "and how readily this muleheaded old lord, who hath no ideas of
his own, adopts the good or evil suggestions of other.  Now, Sauchie
and I have them all, like puppets, in our grasp!  But I would fain
see the mouth of yonder fellow, Borthwick, stopped with earth for
ever!"

At that moment they entered the palace door, and followed Lord Angus
straight to the presence of the king.




CHAPTER XIX.

HOW BORTHWICK FULFILLED HIS PROMISE.

  "My path was waylaid by a band
    Of ruffians hired to kill;
  They seized and tied me hand and foot
    Though me they owed no ill.

  "A dreary night and day I passed;
    All hope was far removed;
  I thought each hour would prove my last;
    Yet Anna still I loved."--_The Druid_.


In fulfilment of his boast made in the Tower of Bronghty Borthwick
had fully examined "all the avenues" to the chamber of Lady Margaret
Drummond, preparatory and previous to her abduction.  By inquiries
cunningly pursued among the domestics within, and by observations
made from without, he had discovered the exact locale of her
bed-chamber, and her hour for retiring, and now, being aware that the
prince was hunting in the Howe of Angus, he resolved to make the
attempt at once.

As yet there was no appearance of the Laird of Largo's dreaded ships
returning; but the evening of the appointed day closed darkly and
hazily in, and the three vessels of Captain Howard had been descried
by Sir Patrick Gray from the Craig of Bronghty, as they crept slowly
and stealthily in shore.

It was one of those evenings when the chill east wind brings a thick
_haar_, as the Scots name it, from the German Sea, when the moon
veils her head in the clouds, and a murky gloom envelopes everything.

It was one hour past Margaret's usual time for retiring, yet she was
not in bed.  During the whole of that day and the day preceding, the
new joy which had replaced her usually sad and quiet demeanour, the
light that sparkled in her calm soft eyes, and the buoyancy of her
spirits, were remarked by her sisters; but they knew not that
Margaret was happy because her important secret was shared and
approved of by her father, who had ridden away to Dunblane,
accompanied by Carnock and Balloch, to examine the cathedral
registers, and assure himself that nothing was wanting but the Papal
dispensation to make all clear, on announcing to Parliament, when it
met in the metropolis, that his daughter was Duchess of Rothesay, and
the mother of a little princess who yet might wear that crown of
thorns which was the inheritance of the Stuarts.

The fact of a priest and bishop being cognizant of a marriage within
the degrees forbidden by the church, affords a strong proof that the
corruption and neglect by which that church was crumbling down in
Scotland were beginning a hundred years before the Reformation was
achieved by Knox and his followers.

Margaret was happy, too, because she would soon be able to impart to
her dear sisters, whom she loved so tenderly, the perilous secret,
which she was ever upbraiding herself for having withheld from them
so long; and she imagined how great would be the astonishment of
Euphemia and Sybilla when her baby would be shown to them, and the
joy of little Lizzie and Beatie finding themselves aunts to a real
live princess.

Wearied with long surmises and thoughtful reveries, and with fondling
her pretty little Margaret--for it had been named after herself and
the queen-mother--and with hushing those feeble cries which as yet
had never gone beyond the thick stone walls of the tapestried room,
nor been heard by any one save her faithful old nurse and constant
attendant, the beautiful young duchess had fallen asleep on her bed,
partly undressed, and with the babe nestling in her bosom.  On the
inside her door was secured by those complicated bolts of wood and
iron with which all internal doors were then fastened in old Scottish
houses, but her window, which was in the round-tower at the
street-corner _still_ appears never to have possessed a grating.

Twelve tolled in the tower of the "Blessed Virgin-in-the-fields."
The mist was thicker, and the night darker than ever.

Margaret did not hear the sound of feet in the narrow street below,
for the lurkers there trod softly; neither did she hear their voices,
for they spoke in whispers; but there, masked, muffled, and disguised
as peasants, in broad round bonnets, frieze gaberdines, and deerskin
boots, were the governors of Stirling and Broughty, with _Sir_ Hew
Borthwick; other followers they had none, for this expedition was so
desperate and daring that they could trust none, even from among the
many well-chosen ruffians with whom the two chief traitors had
garrisoned the royal castles committed to their care.

Margaret did not hear the jarring of two long lances, tied together,
against the panes of glass, as by this means they affixed the iron
hooks of a rope ladder to the stone mouldings of the tower
window-sole, and then held it firm and steadily at the foot, while
Borthwick clambered to the casement, which (although it was
twenty-five feet from the ground) he reached with ease, and raising
the sash entered softly.  He then stood within the apartment, with
two naked poniards in his belt, for defence, in case of surprise or
attack.

All appeared just as we have described it before--the rich little
couch, the carved _prie-Dieu_, the Venetian mirror, with its bottles
of rose-water, pots of essence and other appurtenances, and the thick
dark tapestry.  The wax tapers in the silver girandoles on the
dressing-table were dimly burning and flickering, for the wicks were
long, and snuffers were not invented until the epoch of James IV.

Margaret lay on her couch, fast asleep, with one white arm extended
on her pillow, and the other round her infant, whose little head
reposed on a luxuriant mass of her thick brown hair, which had
escaped from that golden net or caul, then worn by the ladies of the
court, and was streaming over her pillow.  The ribbon points of her
long boddice were partly untied, and on the dressing-table lay a
multitude of those skewers of gold and silver tags and clasps which
noble dames then used, before the simple invention of the _pin_,
which was first adopted by Catharine Howard, an English queen.  The
rosy and dimpled hands of the infant, like its round and sleeping
face, were nestling in the bosom of its young and delicate mother.

It was a touching picture of perfect innocence and love reposing
together; but it affected not the sensual and cowardly heart of the
ignoble Borthwick, or of Sir Patrick Gray, whose black head, through
the mask of which his fierce and sinister eyes, that gleamed like two
evil stars, might have been seen peering over the window-sole into
the chamber of the sleeping girl.  Something that glittered in the
mouth of this baronial bravo, a nearer inspection would have shown to
be a dagger, which he held between his teeth.

"Well, 'pon my soul, the prince's taste is not bad!" grumbled the
other ruffian (who was flushed with wine), as he contemplated the
beautiful girl, whose soft and regular breathing was the only sound
that broke the silence of the sanctuary on which he was intruding his
unhallowed presence.  "A baby, too!  Oho! now, whose brat may this
be?"

Margaret turned her noble head, parted her fine lips, and smiled
tenderly in her sleep.

Borthwick thought she was about to waken, and shrunk irresolutely
back; but the dreams of such innocence as hers are ever pleasing and
gentle, so the young girl still slept on.

"Donnart fool! why dost thou tarry?" asked Gray, in a hoarse whisper.
"Be quick!"

His voice half wakened Margaret, and she moved her head again, and a
sigh escaped her lips.

Borthwick drew from his breast one of those large and gaudy Dutch
cotton handkerchiefs which were then common in Scotland, and with
brutal energy tied it completely over the head of Margaret, and,
tightening it across her mouth, muffled and stifled any cry she might
have uttered; but the slightest sound was impossible, for sudden
terror deprived her of all power of thought or action.  He then
raised her in his powerful arms, even as he would have done the
wakened infant, which now began to raise its plaintive little voice,
and which he shook roughly off, as it grasped its mother's thick soft
hair.  He bore her to the window, and thrust her through it, upon the
right arm of Sir Patrick Gray, who grasped with his left hand the
rope ladder (which was firmly secured below by Sir James Shaw), and
which he descended in safety to the ground.

Borthwick sprang after them, but as Shaw lent his assistance to bear
off Margaret, the light ladder swayed about in the wind, which dashed
the growling and enraged conspirator against the rough wall like a
plummet; by this means it snapped, and he fell heavily to the ground,
but he hurried after the two barons, who were bearing Margaret down
to the beach, which was then within less than a pistol-shot of the
house.

As she had now freed her head from the muffler, she uttered a
succession of shrill and piercing cries; but none heard or attended
to them, for the stillness and darkness of midnight rested on the
mist-shrouded town and river.  In that "good old time," when the
country-houses of the Scottish gentry were manned and moated
garrisons, or towers that were entered at an upper story by ladders,
which the careful inmates drew up after them; when their towns had
walls with barrier-portes, and their streets had neither lights nor
pavements, but when every window was grated, and every close and wynd
secured by a massive gate; when people carried lanterns at night, and
every one went armed to the teeth, as a security against every one
else--the clash of swords or the cries of fear and danger excited but
little interest.  Thus, without suffering the least interruption, the
knightly ruffians and their accomplice reached the beach, where,
within a bowshot of the chapel of St. Nicholas, Captain Edmund
Howard, with a well-armed boat's-crew of picked English seamen,
awaited them in the yawl of the _Royal Harry_.

"Do not be alarmed, fair lady," said he, as Margaret was borne over
the chafing surf, and placed in the stern-sheets of the boat by a man
who grasped her with the tenacity of a vice, and who whispered
huskily and impiously in her ear.

"Be not afraid of me, lady, for I am innocent as the Paschal Lamb,
and as gentle to boot."

"By that blessed name," she implored, "I conjure you to tell me the
meaning of this? and who you are----"

"I am Sir Hew Borthwick, knight of an unfortunate ilk, but your most
devoted servitor, lady."

"O, heavenly mercy!" she murmured, on hearing that terrible name, and
believing that all her old forebodings were about to be realized,
immediately fainted, or became powerless, and had no longer any
capability of coherence in speech or thought.

"Devil be thanked--now we shall have no more trouble with her," said
Borthwick, as Captain Howard kindly spread his own velvet mantle over
her.

"Poor little thing," said he; "she has fallen among evil hands; but,
thank heaven, this dog's duty will soon be over.  To-night she will
swing in her hammock, aboard the _Royal Harry_."

"And to-morrow may mingle her tears with the waters that bear her to
English Harry's prison," added Sir James Shaw, laughing.

"Hold water a moment, my lads," said the English captain, as he flung
a purse to Borthwick, who caught it as a hungry dog does a bone.
"Master Hew, this is the last largess of King Henry's I hope you will
ever receive from my hand."

"Thank you, Captain Howard--life is a race, and money the prize.  In
this world we always scorn honest poverty and worship gilded crime."

"Philosophy in a cur's throat," muttered Howard.  "Adieu, gentlemen;
when next I unfurl St. George's cross in these waters, I hope to do
it in fair daylight, when bringing to your shores a bright-eyed
English queen.  And now give way, my hearties," he added, as the oars
were dipped into the water, and the boat was slewed round--"give way
for life!"

"Or death," said Borthwick, with a chuckling laugh, as he concealed
the heavy purse in his broad leathern girdle.  "Farewell, sirs."

"Farewell," cried Howard, with one hand grasping the tiller and the
other placed at the side of his mouth to convey the sound--"and may
the great devil go with you for a rascally Scots pirate and ground
shark."

Margaret lay in a death-like faint, and this gallant English
gentleman, while commiserating her fate and cursing the secret duty
on which his subtle king had sent him, still urged his men to _give
way_, and at every stroke their fourteen oars almost lifted the light
boat out of the water.  Howard raised the mantle repeatedly from the
pale face of his prisoner, and the soft beauty of her features served
every moment to increase the disgust he felt for himself and his
Scottish colleagues.

The tide was ebbing fast, and as the river was running like a
millrace, they soon reached the _Royal Harry_, which, with her
consorts, was abreast of Broughty Castle, laying to, with her fore
and mizen yards aback; but it was not until she was placed on one of
the cushioned lockers of the great cabin, where proper restoratives
were kindly and judiciously applied by two pretty young female
attendants whom Howard had brought for her from London, that poor
Margaret began to recover from her first shock of terror, and to
become aware of where she was.

With the wind right ahead, the _Harry_ began to beat out of the
narrow channel, on each side of which are broad and dangerous
sandbanks, which then were alike destitute of lights and buoys; but a
quartermaster was in the fore-chains, constantly heaving the lead.
The night was misty, for a thick eastern haar yet floated on the
bosom of the sea.  The moon, now full-orbed and brilliant, was
shining, like a lamp-globe of obscured glass, shorn of its beams,
which lent a palpable whiteness to the mist they could not pierce.
As the wind freshened a little and made gaps through the fogbank, the
moonlight played along the waves, which followed each other in long
white lines of glittering foam.

The English ships heeled over as the breeze freshened, for they were
now always close-hauled.  The stately _Harry_ rode gracefully over
each long rolling swell that curled under her prow; but Howard
thanked his good angel when he was clear of that dangerous estuary,
and when his next larboard tack enabled him to run far beyond the
shoals of the Buddon-ness.

At times the mist was so dense that the two consorts of the _Harry_
could not discern her top-light; the watch rang the ship's bell every
ten minutes, and they responded.  This monotonous ringing continued
for nearly two hours, when suddenly the watch of the leading English
ship was startled by the report of a heavy culverin, apparently only
a few fathoms distant from their weatherbow, or so close that the red
flash was seen through the white and moonlit haze.

All hands were piped, and with alacrity the seamen stood to their
quarters, but in considerable excitement, for _Andrew Wood_ was
murmured along the decks as the ports were opened and the loaded guns
run out, while Howard hurried Margaret Drummond to a place of safety
below the water-line.  But in accordance with King Henry's express
orders, he was resolved to avoid hostilities if possible, and if the
stranger should prove to be the famous Scottish admiral, to deceive
him by answering his hail in _French_.




CHAPTER XX.

WOOD MEETS HOWARD.

  "What though our hands be weaker now
    Than they were wont to be,
  When boldly forth our fathers sailed,
    And conquered Normandie?
  We still may sing their deeds of fame,
    In thrilling harmony;
  They won for us a gallant name,
    Ruling the stormy sea!"--_Ballad_.


After running along the coast of Angus so far as that remarkable
promontory named the Red Head, which rises to the height of two
hundred and fifty feet on the southern shore of Lunan Bay, Sir Andrew
Wood had put his ships about, and under easy sail bore back towards
Dundee, without seeing any trace of the strangers he was in search
of.  From the tops the light had been discerned in the _Big O_ of
Arbroath, as the seamen named the great circular window of St. Thomas
of Aberbrothwick, which was then illuminated at night by the
charitable Benedictines of that magnificent abbey; and it formed a
glorious landmark for those who traversed the German Sea, from whence
it could be seen shining afar off, like a vast moon resting on the
sloping promontory.

About midnight the vessels were creeping along the sandy shore of
Barrie, where the waves rolled far upon the level beach, and chafed
against the heaps or tumuli which cover the graves of the Danish
invaders, when Master Wad, who had the middle watch, pricked up his
ears on hearing the distant sound of a ship's bell.  The silver mist
was still so thick, that when viewed from the stern, the ship's head,
and even the mizen crosstrees, were involved in obscurity.

"I hear a sound," said Falconer, who, lover-like, was still loitering
on deck, and restlessly musing over the hazel-eyed Sybilla, from whom
he calculated he was now only about eight or ten miles distant.
"Willie," said he, "that sound is like the ringing of metal, or is it
the deid bell in my ear?"

"I would hope not," replied the gunner; "for if it is sae, some o' us
will be slipping our cables before day-dawn."

"There it is again--no imaginary, but a solid bell, and it rings in
the mist.  Can it be the Inchcape?"

"Nay, Sir David; the moon is in the west, and the tide in ebbing, so
by the soundings we should ha'e the Buddon-ness about three miles off
on our lee-bow."

"And the Inchcape Bell?"

"About eight miles to windward.  Ewhow, sirs! there are the
top-gallant sails of a large vessel glinting in the moonlight and
aboon the mist like snaw on a hill-top; a pint o' sack to a pint o'
bilge, it is the English captain!  Call up Robert Barton--pass the
word to the admiral!"

The arquebussier who stood on guard near Jacob's ladder passed this
intelligence through the door of the poop, and in a moment Captain
Barton and Sir Andrew came on deck.  As all sailors do, they first
glanced at the compass, and then cast their gaze aloft, to see that
all the sails were full.

"How does she bear?" asked Sir Andrew.

"About a mile off, on the lee-bow, between us and the Gaa sands."

"Gadzooks! her draught of water must be small."

"There she's noo, sir, wi' top-gallants set aloft, for the wind is
but light."

As the gunner spoke the canvas of the strange vessel was seen to
glitter like snow in the moonlight; but for a moment only, as she was
again immediately shrouded in mist.

"What dost thou take her to be, Robbie?" asked the admiral.

"English," replied Barton, tightening his waist-belt, "English by the
rake of her masts and fashion of her top hamper."

"Art sure?"

"I got a full glisk of her just now, as she shot out of one bank into
another.  Hark! there goes her bell again!"

"Master Wad, got ready a gun there, for on the next tack we may fall
aboard of her; I do think she is English, though there was no
red-cross on her fore-topsail.  But clear away for battle, Barton,
for if it is the gallant Howard, we shall avenge thy father's fall,
and make such a din on these waters as will scare all the fish
between Fifeness and the Carlinheugh.  Take in sail, and beat to
quarters."

The kettle-drum rolled and the trumpet was blown: in three minutes
the ports were opened; the sails reduced by the watch; the magazine
opened by the gunner; the arquebussiers of Falconer manned the tops
and poop, and flinging aside their bonnets and gaberdines, five
hundred seamen, grasping the rammers and sponges, the linstocks and
tackle of the cannon, stood in fighting order, while Master Wad fired
a gun, and ran a red lantern up to the mast-head, to let Sir
Alexander Mathieson, who was half a mile astern, know that the
admiral had cleared for action.

"Sail ho!--here she comes again!" cried a hundred voices, as the
gigantic outline of the English ship, looming like a great cloud
through the mist, approached on the opposite tack, and within
pistol-shot.  Both shortened sail by backing their fore and
mizen-yards.  By the line of lights that glittered along the
stranger's deck, her crew were evidently standing by their guns, and
all equally prepared.  Trumpet in hand, Barton, whose heart was
brimming with fiery joy, sprang into the main-chains on the starboard
side.

"Silence fore and aft!" cried he; but the warning was needless, for
then one might have heard a pin fall on board the _Yellow Frigate_.

"Ho--the ship ahoy!"

"_Hola-ho!_" replied a voice from the waist of the stranger.

"French!" muttered Barton, in a tone of disappointment; "what ship is
that?"

"The _Sainte Denis_, caravel of Monseigneur the admiral of the
galleys to his Majesty Charles the Affable."

"This is the _Yellow Caravel_ of his Majesty the King of the Scots.
We knew not that the admiral of France was in these seas."

"We are in pursuit of three English ships commanded by Captain Edmund
Howard, brother of the lord admiral of England."

"So are we, and would give all the teeth in our heads to overhaul
them.  Sir Andrew Wood craves leave to pay his respects ko
Monseigneur d'Esquerdes, admiral of the galleys."

"Monseigneur the Laird of Largo is welcome."

Archy, the old boatswain, was piping away the crew of the barge, when
the pretended Frenchman, having no desire for such a visit, hauled
his wind, braced up his yards, and stood right away into the mist,
with his topsails glittering, after which Sir Andrew Wood saw no more
of him.  The ports were lowered, the culverins secured; Master Wad
locked the magazine with a sigh, as he reflected there was no chance
of fighting; the hammocks were piped down; the yards were squared;
and with no ordinary feelings of disappointment, the crew of the
_Yellow Frigate_ found themselves once more silently passing the
Tower of Broughty towards their former anchorage off the craig of St.
Nicholas.

Intent only on reaching England without perilling the crooked
measures of his sovereign, Captain Howard was glad that he had
succeeded in "throwing dust," as he said, "into the eyes of old
Andrew Wood," and when sorely importuned by his officers and crew to
fight the Scots, is reported to have lost patience, and said,

"God confound ye, fellows; dost think I will carve out my coffin to
please you?"

But fate, however, and the waves and wind were against him; for
before daybreak the mist was swept from the German Sea by a sudden
and heavy gale from the south-east, which nearly threw the _Harry_ on
her beam-ends, and compelled her to run before it, in the very
opposite direction from that which Howard wished to pursue.  He was
driven along the dangerous coast of Kincardine; and before the second
day's sunset, instead of making the coast of England, as they had
hoped, the crews of the three English ships were straining every
nerve, and using all the art of seamanship to weather the dangerous
Cape of Buchan-ness, nearly ninety miles northward from the mouth of
the Tay.

How it fared with Margaret Drummond in the meanwhile will be related
in another chapter of this history.




CHAPTER XXI.

THE PRICE OF THREE TENEMENTS.

  "A letter forged!  St. Jude to speed!
  Did ever knight so foul a deed?"--_Marmion_.


A few pages back, we left the Duke of Rothesay, the Earl of Angus,
and Lord Drummond seeking the presence of James III., all in a high
state of excitement.  They soon reached the hall (already described)
where, during his annual visits to Dundee, the king received
petitions and heard complaints, or held council, with what success we
have already shown.  It was, as usual, crowded by courtiers and
nobles, with their armed followers and dependents; and Hailes, Home,
the Forester of Drum, the Steward of Menteith, and other discontented
personages, were grouping and whispering together.

The king was seated in the great chair, under the purple cloth of
estate; near him stood John Abercrombie, the learned Benedictine, and
they were examining with deep interest Lorenzo della Magna's edition
of Dante's _Inferno_, which had been printed at Florence seven years
before, and had thirteen illustrations engraved by Baldini.  This had
been a gift to James from the Papal ambassador, the Bishop of Imola;
and the almost unlettered Angus gazed with wonder and pity at a king
whose mind was so narrow that he could feel interested in a trifle so
pitiful as a printed book!

The usually stern expression which clouded the dark face of this
great lord of Galloway was partly concealed by the visor of his
helmet; but the excitement under which he laboured was evident, for
he frequently approached James, and withdrew again, as if irresolute
how to broach the subject that oppressed him.

Lord Drummond and Rothesay were equally excited, and their emotion
was balm to the gloomy soul of Sir Patrick Gray who accompanied them,
and who, with his pale thin lips and fine but sharp teeth, his small
wiry hands and cold delusive smile, seemed to be the evil genius of
them all.

"My Lord Angus," said the Constable of Dundee, "dost think this king
of ours will ever prefer the marshalling of hosts to the making of
books and ballads--the clank of armour to rustle of silk--or the
jangle of spurs to the patter of cork-heeled shoon?"

"We shall soon see," replied Angus, hoarsely, through his clenched
teeth, as he darted a savage glance at the Duke of Montrose.

"It would seem not," added the warlike Constable, who, when a mere
youth, had slain the aged Earl of Crawford at the battle of Arbroath;
"he is overmuch of a clerk and carpet squire for me."

Neither Angus nor this Lord of Dudhope had much love for each other,
but like many of the hostile nobles, they cordially agreed in keeping
an iron hand over the poor king, and in resolving to defeat his
projects, whether wise or unwise, and to destroy every favourite
chosen from "the herd," as they designated the people, from whom
unfortunately the favourites of the Stuart princes were generally
chosen.

"Fool-king!" growled the furious earl, "while thou toyest with some
wretched ballad-book, I hold in my hand that which shall startle all
Scotland like the note of the last trumpet."

"Yea," responded the Constable of Dundee, "these balladeers and
book-makers remind me of so many birds of prey hovering about the
throne."

"These carles in iron seem like so many crocodiles watching the poor
king," whispered the Benedictine at the same moment to William
Dunbar, the sweet author of the _Thrissel and the Rois_, for there
was then a feud between the men of the sword and the men of letters,
as it was not an age when they could entertain a high veneration for
each other.

Rothesay's excitement at last became insupportable.  Pale and
trembling with grief and anger, he approached the royal chair, and
stretching out his hands, with his fine eyes full of fire, tears, and
upbraiding, said to the king,--

"Father, is it thus thou hast deceived me!"

"Deceived thee--in what?" asked the astonished monarch.

"Yea, deceived me.  The Lord Drummond told thee how I loved and was
wedded to his daughter; and you gave me hopes of clemency and
forgiveness, while knowing that overnight she had been most cruelly
and foully abducted--torn away from me--from me who loved her better
than my own soul!"

It is impossible to describe the astonishment that was visible in the
faces of all who heard this startling avowal and charge; but in no
face was it more strongly impressed than the king's, and his silence
appeared to Rothesay the dumb confusion of discovered guilt.

"Father and king," said he, firmly, "where is my wife, the Duchess of
Rothesay?"

"Rash monarch!" added Lord Drummond, with a hand on his sword, "I,
too, demand, where is my daughter?"

"By my soul as a man--by my honour as a king, I know not!" replied
James, with dignity and indignation, as he rose from his chair, and
threw the poems of Dante on the dais.

"Restore her to me!" continued the young prince, frantically, while
his dark eyes sparkled through their tears; "restore her, or in three
days I will set all Scotland on fire!"

"'Tis a wile of the English faction to further their Tudor marriage,"
said Lord Lindesay, an opinion in which many nobles concurred;
"beware, my lord, beware of what you say and do!"

Angus stood silent and confounded by this double revelation.

"'Tis enough to weep _once_ over those we love," said Lord Drummond;
"I have wept for my lost daughter, for she was my dearest and best
beloved, the most gentle and bonnie of five; and now I shall think of
vengeance!  None but thee, James Stuart, could have an interest in
removing or destroying her, so restore her, dead or alive, or
vengeance will be the occupation of my life!  The honour of a
Scottish noble cannot be trifled with, even by a Scottish king; so
beware that, when plunging into the abyss of rebellion I do not drag
thy throne down with me!"

Stunned by this terrible and, at such a time, most dangerous
accusation--dangerous, the more so that it came from the lips of his
own son, the good and amiable king gazed irresolutely among the
nobles, and read a threatening expression in all their clouded brows;
even Montrose, his most trusty councillor, cast down his eyes in
doubt, and now the stern face cf Angus, who stood close by him,
leaning on his sword, rivetted his wondering gaze.

"My lord earl," said he, "what is the matter?  Why approach me in
harness, and almost in a close helmet?  Say, dost thou believe me
capable of a deed so vile?"

There was a solemn silence, for it was known that the majority would
adopt the opinion of this potent military chief.

"I do deem thee guilty of this most cruel abduction; yea, and of
worse!" replied the stern Earl, as he threw up the barred umbriere of
his black helmet with a jerk, and drew from his gauntlet a letter
which was folded with care and tied by a ribbon, sealed with purple
wax, and inscribed "_secret, with care_."  "And to prove how far the
bitter memory of our raid at Lauder, and the love of the faithless
and vile will carry thee, I will take the liberty of reading to this
most illustrious audience a letter which is addressed to his Grace of
Montrose, but which, by a blundering pikeman, was brought to my
secretary, who made himself master of its contents.  My lords, these
are terrible!  Strict honour required that it should have been
forwarded to the Earl of Crawford--pardon me--(with a sneer) I mean
your Grace of Montrose; but the common safety of the First Estate
required its immediate publicity."

The stealthy eyes of Sir James Shaw sought those of Gray, and an icy
smile was exchanged; but to others, their faces seemed imperturbable.
A commotion immediately pervaded the hitherto still assembly; and the
old Duke of Montrose, with his sword half-drawn, was approaching
Angus, in great wrath, when his arm was grasped by the king.  Seeing
a storm impending, several of the peers, the Sieur de Concressault,
the Lord Lindesay, and Ramsay, Lord Bothwell, drew near the throne,
the malcontent nobles drew near Angus, while the pale and irresolute
Rothesay stood like a statue between them.

"You know this signature, my lords," said Angus, displaying the
letter.

"It is the king's," said Shaw, almost the only man among them who
could read or write with ease.

"And this seal, _bearing two rocks in the centre of a stormy sea_,
with the motto 'DURABO?'"

"The king's private signet," said Sir Patrick Gray; "we all that as
well as our own faces."

"Read, read, my lord," cried twenty voices; and with some trouble,
though the handwriting of this document of Borthwick, which is now
before us, is very plain, Angus sternly and emphatically read as
follows:--


"To his Grace the Duke of Montrose and Earl of Crawford, our trusty
and heartily beloved friend, Lord Great Chamberlain, &c., be this
delivered.

"Montrose, we greet you well.  The help of the same blessed God, who
has delivered us from many perils, will, I doubt not, with the
assistance and advice of such powerful and zealous subjects as your
grace, soon free our unhappy realm and oppressed people from that
cruel nobility who tyrannize over all.  I have now all prepared for
the great banquet to be given in the Castle of Edinburgh, where, when
Angus, Hailes, Home, and all that party, are birling the wine pot, we
shall show them the _Black Bull's Head_.  Fail not to come with all
your most trusty adherents--men who will close their hearts to every
emotion of pity and remorse, and who will have no thought but the
wish to save Scotland by extirpating a traitorous nobility, who in
all ages have been ready to sell their souls and bodies to the
English kings for gold.  With the fathers, all the sons above the age
of twelve years should also be invited, and such I think was the
suggestion of your grace at our last meeting.  It now remains but to
fix the time of this auspicious banquet.  What say you to the feast
of St. Monina--that evil day of July?  From our Castle of Stirling,
the 7th day of May, 1488.

"JAMES REX."


Exclamations of anger and astonishment burst from every lip, for this
letter contained some artful hits, such as the Bull's Head, which was
the signal for the murder of the Earl of Douglas in 1440, and
Monina's day, which was the anniversary of the raid at Lauder.

The king was fearfully pale.

"My Lord Earl of Angus," said he, controlling his righteous
indignation, "on your allegiance as a subject, I command you to
surrender up this tissue of falsehood--this infamous forgery."

"Nay," replied the earl, with a grim smile; "if your Majesty wishes
it consigned to the custody of the Lord Clerk Register, let him and
other parasites seek it at my Castle of Thrieve, in Galloway, where,
by the cannon's mouth, it shall be faithfully delivered to them or
their messengers."

"Beware, Archibald Douglas, lest ye overtask my patience."

"Beware, James Stuart, for thou playest a perilous game!  So this
precious banquet is to be on Monina's day in July.  I trust _that
party_ will all come with their best swords by their sides."

"The anniversary of the raid of Lauder," said the governor of
Broughty; "an ominous day."

"This is infamous--this is intolerable!" exclaimed the white-haired
Duke of Montrose, unsheathing his sword.

"So say I," added Angus, with a bitter laugh.

"All who dare aver that the king wrote such a letter to me,"
continued Montrose, "or that such was the intention of our state
banquet at Edinburgh, lie foully in their throats, and are false
cravens!  Let us betake us to our swords at once, for the sword alone
can wrest a charter for the people's liberty from this subtle and
tyrannical nobility."

"Duke," said James, "liberty is the inherent right of the people.
They give us prerogatives, but it is not in the power of princes to
give a people what they possess by right of inheritance--liberty."

"Montrose, thou sayest well," said Angus, who did not understand the
hint conveyed by the king's reply; "the sword, the sword, so be it
then," he added, with lofty pride and stern joy; "and with God's
blessing, let the battle field decide whether this kingdom of
Scotland shall be governed by its hereditary peers or the parasites
of a king.  James II. slew two earls of my house; one was murdered in
the castle of Edinburgh in the midst of a friendly feast, another was
stabbed to the heart by a dagger in the Castle of Stirling--stabbed
by the royal hand, and then was flung over the chamber window upon
the rocks below, like the body of a slaughtered hound rather than the
corse of William Douglas, Duke of Touraine, and Lord Supreme of
Galloway.  I shall be wary how your father's son adds a third to the
number."

Angus glared with hatred at Montrose, who was the first subject in
Scotland after the little Duke of Ross, being the first of the
nobility who attained a ducal coronet, a distinction quite sufficient
to gain him the enmity of all the earls of the Douglas faction.

"Oh, Angus," said James, reproachfully, "thou art a fierce subject,
in whose lawless heart uncurbed ambition rages like a devouring
flame; but wouldst thou have thy king to stoop to thee?"

"And why not, if that king hath erred?" asked the earl, bluntly.

"God be the judge between us," said James, raising upwards his hands
and tearful eyes.

"Decide, decide," said Angus, whose anger was increasing every
moment; "banishment to such evil councillors as Montrose, and death
to all ignoble favourites--or death to the peers of Scotland; and
here, at the foot of that throne for which I and ten generations of
my house have often shed the Douglas blood, I throw down the gage of
battle!"

With these daring words Angus drew the steel gauntlet from his right
hand, hurled it at the foot of the throne, and withdrew, followed by
Drummond, Hailes, Home, Gray, and others, who led the bewildered Duke
of Rothesay away with them.  The young Lord Lindesay, and his father
the venerable Montrose, both sprang forward to pick the gauntlet up,
but the latter was successful, and both these loyal nobles, with
several others who loved and pitied the king, followed him to his
private cabinet, to which he immediately withdrew.

"Said I not that I would put all Scotland in a flame?" whispered
Borthwick to Sauchie, as he put his foot in the stirrup to mount at
the palace gate.

"Yea, and verily thou shalt have, as I promised, three of my best
tenements in Stirling, by deed of a notary's hand," replied the Laird
of Sauchie.

Abercrombie the Benedictine, William Dunbar the poet, and other
literary men, were left behind in the hall.  The angry altercation
had somewhat scared them, but they could not resist an expression of
pleasure at the prospect of their enemies, the military nobles,
confronting each other on the field of battle.

"I would not, for a king's ransom, be in the boots of him who penned
this specious forgery!" said the chief of our ancient poets, in his
East Lothian patois.

"Ay, Willie Dunbar," said Father Abercrombie, "with the nobles it
proposed to slay their eldest sons--no bad hint."

"Why, this would make our poor king a heathen, like the Jews of old,"
replied Dunbar.

"Yea, and it reminds me of a passage in the first act of the
_Electra_ of Sophocles."

"You remember of the pagan emperor, who amused himself catching
flies?" said the translator of Sallust, laughing.

"I warrant you, Brother Barclay," replied Dunbar, "the king will find
these carles increase like unto so many wasps.  But hint not that,
even in jest, our blessed king conceived a thought so vile as that
banquet of blood."

"Alas!" said the young poet Henrison, sorrowfully, "who among us can
foresee the end of all this?  Life is unstable as sunshine on the
water."

"Yes, my good master of arts," replied Barclay, "it is even our
friend Dunbar sings in his sweet Lament--

  "Our pleasaunce here is all vane glory,
  This false world is but transitory:
  The flesh is bruckle, the fiend is slee--
      _Timor mortis conturbat me!_"


Dunbar gave a gratified smile at this quotation from his and bowed to
the learned Benedictine.  At that moment the clatter of hoofs drew
them all to the north windows of the hall, and they beheld the noisy
train of Angus gallop along the street with lances uplifted, and his
banner with the _red heart_ displayed.  The earl, with the Duke of
Rothesay and others, were with them, and save the prince, all were
brandishing their drawn swords, and crying, "A Douglas! a Home! to
arms!  Remember the raid of Lauder!"

To these tumultuous cries many added others, such as, "No English
alliance, no invasion of Bretagne!  Remember Andrew Barton!"  And
making a terrible din as they poured along the narrow street, Angus,
with five hundred armed men, issued from the western gate of Dundee,
and, conveying the young heir of Scotland with him, took the road
direct for the royal burgh of Stirling.




CHAPTER XXII.

THE SILKEN CORD.

  "Faintingly her head she bendeth,
    And on my dim and dewy eyes,
  A kiss her purple mouth bestoweth,
    Sweet repayment, while she sighs--
  'Ah, that fondling in thine arms,
    Thus may I ever live and die!'
  She ceased, and the heart of Euphrasie
    In the joy forgot the sigh."


We must go a little back in this, our history, to inform the reader
how the daughters of Lord Drummond received his proposition of making
one of them Lady of Home and the other Lady of Hailes.  He did not
find them quite so pliant or acquiescent as the noble lords for whom
he destined them.

In the morning, before Margaret's abduction had been discovered, and
when the cold roasted beef, the venison pies, and tankards of hot
spiced ale, on which the good folks of those days breakfasted, were
awaiting them in the dining-hall, he sent impatiently for Euphemia
and Sybilla, and announced his views regarding them, simply saying
that the safety of the state in a struggle which all men saw
approaching required many bonds of union among the nobles, and that
the bonds of matrimony being the surest, it was requisite, by an
alliance with these two military chiefs, to strengthen his house, as
he was now well up in years, had many enemies, and so forth.

Poor Sybilla, whose lover had avowed his passion to none save
herself, and whose claim upon her love and honour were known to her
only, received this startling announcement with terror and dismay;
for it crushed and bewildered her like a sentence of death.  But
Euphemia, who was proud and fiery, and the day of whose marriage with
Robert Barton had been already named, and was now only postponed in
consequence of his father's death, received the proposal with
astonishment, and with the indignation it merited.

"My father, this cannot be!" she exclaimed, setting her pretty foot
firmly on the floor, and nervously adjusting her satin hood, "you
know that I am solemnly, and by a ritual of our Church, promised and
affianced to Robert Barton.  My uncle, the Dean of Dunblane, heard my
_trothplight_ at the altar, when I received this betrothal ring; our
promise of marriage is sanctioned and blessed by the Church, and can
no more be broken than the band of marriage itself, without
committing sacrilege and sin."

The old lord fidgetted about, for he felt the truth of what she said.

"Oh think again, dearest father, of what you require of us?" added
Euphemia.

"Us--_us_?  I address myself to you, in the first place, Dame
Euphemia.  The noble lovers I provide for you are not to be trifled
with, and will assuredly brush from their path the son of Barton the
merchant----"

"Sir Andrew Barton, the knight and admiral," interposed
Euphemia--"Barton the Laird of Barnton and Almondell!"

"Barton umquhile skipper and trader," said the father, angrily, as he
tore open the ribbons of his doublet and walked hurriedly up and down
the oak floor, stamping hard on his red-heeled boots at every turn.

"Dear father," urged the plaintive voice of Sybilla, "bethink thee
what our dearest mother would have thought of such a proposition."

"Just what she thought when such a proposition was made to her thirty
years ago--God assoilize her!  She was a good and loving wife to me,
and yet--dost know how we came to be espoused?"

"Because you loved her, I would hope."

"Loved--fiddlestick! not a bit, at that time at least.  When I was a
beardless young callant, the Murrays of Athole marched into
Strathearn, and came down by the woods of Ochtertyre and Comrie, with
pipes playing and banners displayed, to harry the lands of Drummond
of Mewie, and levy at the sword's point the tiends of the kirk of St.
Ronan at Monzievaird.  Mewie was slain by them--shot dead by three
arrows.  This was not to be borne!  I marched with all the stout lads
of the stewartry against the Murrays, but they were too strong for me
then, and I was obliged to _gang warily_ until Lord Crawford offered
to lend me five hundred lances from Angus.  We soon cleared all Upper
Strathearn of the Murrays, and drove them through Glenturrit and
Glenlednock.  We besieged them in St. Ronan's kirk--fired its heather
roof, burned one half of them alive, and claymored the rest.  In
gratitude to Crawford, who had more daughters than he knew what to do
with, I married Elizabeth Lindesay, and a good wife and true she was
to me--although at first she made many a moan, for she had been
affianced to Drummond of Mewie; but who cares for woman's tears when
trumpets are blown?"

"Father," said Euphemia, "thou forgettest that a woman has but one
heart to lose--one heart to bestow."

"'Sdeath!  I shall lose my patience, and bestow my curse on some of
ye.  Some harper or balladeer, some tramper or Egyptian hath put this
stuff into your head.  Whoever heard of hearts or lovers standing in
the way of great lords--of castles and broad acres--of bands of
mail-clad men?  Stuff, I tell thee, Effie; Hailes and Home will both
be made earls, and you shall both become countesses.  I swear by
every altar in yonder kirk of Mary, you shall!  We have had a queen
and a Lady of the Isles in the family, but never a countess yet!"

"Father, this cruelty and sacrilege will break my heart--it will kill
me."

"I never heard of a lusty lass like thee being killed by marriage
yet.  Now do not provoke me, for my mind is made up.  Come hither,
Sybilla; thou wilt not take a plaguey love-fit to vex thy old father?"

"Alas! father----"

"What! 'sdeath! hast thou no heart either, and wilt thou become a
contumacious gipsy?"

"Hear me, dear father----"

"I'll hear nothing but thy promise to be the bride of Hailes, or of
Home, I care not which; but one you shall have, so settle it between
ye.  They are both brave and handsome gallants, with a good retinue
at their cruppers.  I have no time for more of this," he continued,
buckling on his enormous sword; "or for reponding to the devil's
litanies of such gadabouts as either of ye."

The announcement of Lady Margaret's disappearance gave a sudden
change to this extraordinary conversation, and springing at a wrong
conclusion, Lord Drummond impetuously rushed away in search of
Rothesay, whom, as already related, he met in St. Clement's Wynd,
from whence they proceeded to the poor king, leaving Sybilla and
Euphemia overwhelmed with grief and consternation by this new and
sudden calamity; for no trace of Margaret could be found, and the
discovery of her poor little babe, concealed in the alcove of the
turret, served but to augment their sorrow and perplexity.

Next morning the anchors of the frigate were barely down before Jamie
Gair, who acted as pilot, and others who came off in the shore-boats,
informed those on board of the strange rumours then current in
Dundee.  One man informed Archy the boatswain of how the Lady
Margaret Drummond had been carried off by the king's order, and
drowned in the pools of Errol; another told Master Wad how Angus and
Drummond had quarrelled with the king, and would have slain him but
for the timely intervention of the French ambassador, the Mareschal
de Concressault, and the Lord High Constable; a hundred other
stories, equally absurd and improbable, were heard by other members
of the crew; and the excitement which evidently prevailed ashore,
caused some alarm on board of the ships.

The admiral doubled the guard of arquebusses on the poop and
forecastle, loaded the cannon, moored the ships with a spring upon
their cables, ordered that all boats should be kept a bow-shot off,
and desiring the barge to be piped away, hurried ashore with all her
crew armed by jacks of mail below their canvas gaberdines.

Falconer, Barton, and the admiral were in half armour.  The latter
hastened to the presence of the afflicted king, whom he found highly
excited by his late altercation with Angus and Rothesay; while the
two companions--the lovers--repaired to the mansion of Stobhall.

Borthwick, whom Sir Patrick Gray had desired to act as a spy upon the
inmates of that stately residence from the moment the ships had been
seen in the estuary, threw himself, sans leave, upon a coalier's
horse, which he found tethered to a ring in St. Clement's Wynd, and
galloped to Broughty, where the malcontent noblesse were assembled in
solemn but somewhat angry conclave; and there he informed Lord
Drummond and his two intended sons-in-law that the young ladies had
visitors.  Upon this, the trio formed a little plot within their
greater conspiracy, to remove, or as Lord Drummond said, to brush
Barton and Falconer from their path for ever, and if possible to
entrap the good old admiral, and get the two king's ships into their
own hands; for the _Yellow Frigate_ and the _Margaret_ were then the
flower of the Scottish fleet, which, in the infancy of our maritime
affairs, mustered only a few sail.

In that time England had no more; for Henry VII. and Henry VIII.,
when requiring ships for warlike purposes, seized without ceremony
upon the largest merchantmen in their English ports.  In 1512 the
fleet of James IV. consisted of forty-six sail, and was in no way
inferior to the fleets of Henry of England or Don Emanuel, King of
Portugal.

Borthwick, a wretch whose whole life had been a lie, a cheat, a web
of mischief and infamy, informed the three lords that Robert Barton
was in the house with Lady Euphemia, and that Sir David Falconer was
in the garden with her sister.  On this they all rushed to their
horses, summoned the Lairds of Carnock and Balloch and other armed
followers of trust, and left the tower of Broughty intent on some
desperate outrage.

"So, then, 'tis Falconer whom Sybilla loves," said Hailes; "and 'tis
she whom I have made up my mind to win if I can.  I have observed
that in his presence she always became brighter and more beautiful.
I was sharp enough to see that a spell was upon her; but I had no
idea then that she would ever be more to me than her aunt, the old
dame of Montrose."

"Prick on! prick on!" urged Home, spurring his horse; "we will soon
teach these varlets the penalty of raising their eyes to noble
ladies."

Unaware of the coming storm, Barton sat with Euphemia in the chamber
of dais; and Falconer with Sybilla in a summer house or alcove at the
foot of the garden, the southern boundary of which was the bed of the
Tay.

Shaded from the brilliant sun of noon by the trellis-work, the thick
honeysuckle and the privet, the lovers sat within their bower.  The
shining river chafed the yellow sand at their feet in all its
greenness and verdure, the opposite coast seemed to palpitate in a
blaze of light; and midway between, with all their yards squared by
the boatswain's critical eye, their white sails neatly handed, and
their great blue ensigns drooping listlessly over their carved poops,
the stately caravels of the Laird of Largo rode at their moorings
with their heads to the ebbing tide.

Believing that none were watching and that none could see them,
Sybilla, in the excess of grief for her sister's mysterious
disappearance, had thrown herself upon the breast of Falconer.  All
his whispers were full of hope and affection, and Sybilla wept while
she listened.  Confined in its caul of gold, her glossy hair hung in
a heavy cluster on the shoulder of Sir David, and her hands were
locked in his.  The lover endeavoured to convince her that their sad
and gentle Margaret was not, as the credulous burghers averred,
destroyed by the king, but most probably was abducted by him or young
Rothesay, and secured in some of the royal castles, but for what end
none could then foresee; at all events, to be assured that her safety
was certain, and that they would infallibly hear of her soon, as none
could have a pretext for injuring a being so good and gentle.
Sybilla allowed herself to be persuaded, and a faint smile began to
steal over her soft and downcast face.

Never did the rich costume of the court of James III. appear to
better advantage than on the fine form of Sybilla Drummond.  Her
kirtle was of green brocade, and an open robe of cloth-of-silver fell
behind her, edged with fur and lined with white satin.  Her girdle
was of silver, and there, as at her white forehead, her swelling
bosom and delicate little ears, hung long pearl pendants.

Women are said "to love those who follow desperate professions;" but
in those days, though the men of Scotland were all desperate fellows,
they had no professions to follow save the church, the sword, or the
sea; so it was rather the chivalric uprightness of his character, the
gallantry of his bearing, and the superiority which his educated mind
gave him over the brutal barons and unlettered lords of her time,
that made Sybilla yield up her pure and simple love to this young
soldier, who was one of James's favourites, and a protégé; for his
father had died in battle on the deck of his ship, defending the
harbour of Blackness when assailed by the English fleet seven years
before.

They did not speak much, this young and dreaming pair, for their
hearts were too full of tenderness and hope, desperate hope, that
their love might be successful; and being loth to pain unnecessarily
the heart of her lover, Sybilla, unlike the haughty Euphemia, did not
confide to him the intentions of her father regarding that young
noble whom he had sworn to make his son-in-law at all hazards; but
with the superstition incident to her time, rather than to herself,
she enumerated a number of omens of impending evil which now can only
excite a smile--and Falconer smiled at them even then.

Yesterday, when going to the chapel of the Grey Sisters in the
Overgaitt, ahe had seen a single crow flying straight before her--an
infallible omen of mischance; and this morning at sunrise, when
watching the swans that swam on the river, one uttered a wild,
wailing, and melodious sound, such as she had never heard before.
She thought it was enchanted; but an hour after it was seen to float
upon the water with outstretched wings, quite dead--another terrible
omen!

"The swan was dying, dearest Sybie, and was singing its own sweet
dirge," replied Falconer; "but thou hast heard what few have the
fortune to hear--though there is nothing wonderful in it.  If Archy
of Anster our wight boatswain were here, he could tell thee of
stranger things; of an ocean where the fish turn all manner of
beautiful colours before they die; of gigantic plants that flower but
once in a hundred years, and happy is he who beholds them then; of
islands where every tree utters a melodious sound when the soft wind
sweeps through their fairy leaves, and of birds that live for six
long centuries, and having no mate, burn themselves to death in a
nest of spices, from whence a young one springs forth with all its
plumage sprouting--the phoenix of Arabia!  In the bosom of Nature,
dearest, there is hidden many a secret of which we know nothing."

"I have heard Father Zuill speak of such things to my sister
Margaret," said Sybilla, weeping at her name.

"Our chaplain--ah! he hopes one day to invent a mirror which will
consume ships and cities, scorch forests to charcoal, and mountains
to cinders, and put cannon and arquebusses quite out of fashion, like
the mangonels and balistæ of the olden time.  What would become of me
then?  I should have to learn some other trade than soldiering, or go
to battle with a mirror on my back.  It is the insanity of science."

"Yet I have heard that your old Dominican is a famous preacher."

"Ay, Willie Wad, our gunner, swears that when he expounded on the
Deluge, one day, all the fishes arose from the water and sat upon
their tails to hear his discourse, as they of old to St. Anthony,
when he preached.  But Cuddie, the admiral's coxswain, averred that
it was only because they had more reason to be grateful than other
animals, being the sole portion of the animated creation that escaped
the great flood in the days of old Admiral Noah.  But thou dost not
smile, Sybie--sweet-heart."

Between these two there was a reciprocity of sentiment so complete,
that conversation was, perhaps, little wanted at that sad and anxious
interview.  Neither had a thought, a hope, or a fear, in which the
other did not participate; and now, for more than another hour they
sat dreaming side by side, or only exchanging mute and little
caresses, as Sybilla reclined her head on Falconer's shoulder.  Her
eyes were fixed on the still flow of the sunlit Tay, while his were
gazing on the radiance and serenity of her pure and delicate face.

He thought that a time _might_ come when this dear spell would be
broken--when the tendril that clung to him, this gentle one who had
entwined herself around his heart, and who loved him with all the
purity and fervour of a young and confiding girl, would be torn from
him and given to another.  It might be; such things happened often in
Scotland then; and at that foreboding thought, a frown wrinkled the
brow of Falconer; a cold anguish entered his heart, and he was
obliged to turn away, lest the timid Sybilla should see the
expression of menace which he knew such a terrible anticipation
wrought upon his features.  Was this a foreboding of what was to come?

At such moments Falconer would feel the white straight brow of
Sybilla come nearer his cheek, and her hand tighten its clasp in his;
then his angry fears evaporated, in the tenderness that mute caress
inspired.

Poor lovers! they heard not the stealthy steps that were creeping
down the gravel walks; they saw not the fierce and mocking eyes of
those who, from without the leafy bower, were watching, with mingled
scorn and amusement, this interchange of endearments and this purity
of soul, in which they could not share; for, acting on the
information received from Borthwick, those inseparable companions,
Hailes and Home, with the Lairds of Carnock, Balloch, and others,
were all close by, armed and intent on some deed of cruelty.

Suddenly their ominous shadows darkened the sunny entrance of the
bower!  The lovers started, and beheld five or six pairs of eyes
regarding them with expressions of menace and insolence.

"Villain, draw!" said Lord Hailes, imperiously.

"'Pon my soul, you have a polite way of announcing yourself," said
Falconer, scornfully, as he drew his sword and placed himself before
the terrified Sybilla, around whom he threw his left arm as a
protection.

"I most humbly crave pardon for this unpleasant intrusion, Lady
Sybilla," said Hailes, uncovering his head, and bowing till his
plumed bonnet swept the grass--but bowing with bitter irony: "we must
hale forth this man, whose presence disgraces you."

"Fellow, come forth!" cried Home, unsheathing his sword; "the crows
shall hold thy lykewake to-night."

"Gie him Lauder Brig owre again," said Drummond of Carnock, making a
thrust, which drew a shrill cry from Sybilla, and a successful parry
from Falconer, whose sword twisted the other's blade out of his hand,
and sent it flying over a tree-top behind him.

"A devil of a fellow this!" said Balloch.

"An insolent churl!" added the two lords.

"Allow me to suggest to your lordships the cultivation of courage as
a quality--the acquisition of politeness being an impossibility,"
said Falconer, with a withering glance.

At this sneer the rage of his assailants knew no bounds; and they
lunged at him again and again severally and with all their swords
together, but being within the bower he kept them completely at bay.

"Come forth, I tell thee, villain!" said Home, imperiously, "that I
may handsel a new sword on thy plebeian head."

"Proud lord," said Falconer, as by one well-directed thrust he
pierced the sword-arm of Hailes; "ere long we will teach thee, and
such as thee, who fight only to uphold long pedigrees and overweening
privileges, that the Scottish people will not submit to be trampled
on by a horde of titled traitors."

"May I die, fellow, but thou shalt eat these words," cried Hailes,
hoarsely, and still pressing on, while his sword-arm dripped with
blood.

"I know one thing thou wilt never die of--shame," said Falconer,
laughing, as he thrust him back at full length on the sward.  At that
moment, the gallant young arquebussier, who was so fully occupied in
front that he did not hear Borthwick breaking through the bower
behind him, suddenly felt his arms seized by that personage; and then
his assailants, two of whom were infuriated by wounds, rushed upon
him; tore the screaming Sybilla from his arm, wrested away his sword,
and dashed him to the earth.  Now there was an ominous pause, as to
whether or not they should despatch him at once.

"Gie him Lauder Brig, I till ye!" cried Balloch again.

"Thou art right, laird," said Home, fiercely; "but we have no tent
cords."

"But here is my scarf," said Hailes, whose hands clutched the throat
of Falconer like a tiger's fangs.  "Knot me a noose some of you, and
pull with a will."

"Quick," added Carnock; "pull--pull!  By Saint Beelzebub, my fine
fellow, thou wilt soon look like a gled nailed on a byre-door."

In the hands of so many, Sir David Falconer, though young, powerful,
and athletic, was completely overmastered; and now ensued one of
those terrible scenes which so often darkened the annals of our
country.  The scarf, which was of soft silk, was tied round
Falconer's neck in a slip-knot, with grim deliberation.

"Save me from this butchery, Lord Home--for _her_ sake," said
Falconer, making tremendous efforts to free himself; "or, at least,
remove her in pity.  Hear me, Home--thou wert once loyal and gallant."

"Peace, villain," replied that ferocious peer, as he smote the brave
suppliant full and heavily on the mouth with his hand.

"Mercy," implored Sybilla, sinking on her knees, and clinging to the
hand of Borthwick, who held her as in a giant's grasp; "mercy for
him, and for the love of God!  Man--man--thou hast been a priest, and
must yet remember that the merciful are blessed, for they shall
obtain mercy.  Have pity!  O have pity; by the Star of Heaven, by the
Queen of Angels, I implore you to have pity!"

But Borthwick, who was wholly employed in looking down upon that
snowy bosom, of which her kneeling position enabled him to see more
than was ever meant for eyes like his, heeded her not; but grasped
her with the strength and tenacity of an iron vice; and now, while
her cries and entreaties would have melted the hearts of any men but
those of the Scottish noblesse of 1488, these miscreants began to
strangle and drag Falconer, by the knotted scarf, towards the river.

"For God's love--for her sake--gentlemen--my Lord's--good sirs, do
not murder me thus before her face--before her; remove her--beloved
Sybilla--pity, pity--mercy, am I to die like a dog--for her--for her
sake, monsters--God!----"

The tightening of the knot cut short the cries of Falconer, who in
that terrible moment thought only of Sybilla; but dragged as he was
by the throat, strangulation immediately ensued; his handsome
features became swollen, livid, and frightful; his eyeballs
protruded.  He tossed his arms about him wildly; but the third time
he was dragged round the bower, he was senseless, lifeless, and
stiff; and the assassins, after bestowing a few parting kicks on the
body, carefully sheathed their swords, which had been lying on the
ground, and retired, leisurely and without precipitation.

"Adieu, lady," said Lord Hailes, with a stern loftiness of manner;
"now we have revenged your honour on this presumptuous churl."

"Farewell, and I give you joy of your lemane, sweet madam," said
Borthwick, mockingly, as he released her.

With a shriek Sybilla sprang to the breathless body of her lover.
Her fingers were trembling, weak, and powerless; thus she strove
fruitlessly to loosen the hateful scarf which encircled his neck.
The attempt was vain, for there was no strength in her.

Then, overcome by the frightful, swollen, and blackened aspect of
that beloved face, she uttered another wild, despairing cry, and fell
prostrate and senseless upon him.

So ended this scene of horror!




CHAPTER XXIII.

LORD DRUMMOND AND ROBERT BARTON

  "How can I 'scape Antonia!--how evade
  A father's stern inflexible decree?
  Paint but the means, I ne'er shall be afraid
  To tread a path prescribed by love and thee."
                                      _Bridal of Pisa_


While this atrocity was acted in the garden, and about a pistol shot
distant from the mansion, Robert Barton received from Lady Euphemia a
sorrowful and excited explanation of her father's new and peculiar
views regarding herself and her sister; on hearing which the lover
lost all patience, and said all one might be supposed to say on
receiving such startling information.  David Falconer would, perhaps,
have heard it in silent sorrow, for he felt himself poor and
powerless; but the wealthy heir of old Sir Andrew Barton had no doubt
on the subject of his own conduct.

"'Zounds, Effie, what is this you tell me?  Would your father, Lord
of that ilk, and Steward of Strathearn though he be, wrest thee from
me? thee whom the Church hath given me--who art all but my wife, and
wear on that dear hand the betrothal ring, which soon must be a
bridal one?  No, no!  Yonder lieth the frigate, and the barge's crew
are at the Craig of St. Nicholas; say but the word, and I shall place
the broad waters of the Tay between thee and these Lords of Home and
Hailes!  They may be the prouder and the sterner, but that they are
either richer or better men than Robert Barton of Leith I deny.
'Sdeath, 'tis little I value such holiday loons!  Mass!  I would like
rarely to see them both piped aloft in a close-reefed topsail breeze
to send down the topgallant-yard, or haul out a weather-earing!  On
my faith, it would be a sight for old Andrew Wood."

"Alas! they have seldom less than each a thousand lances at their
back; and thou, dear Robert, hath none."

"None, say ye, Effie?  I have every man in yonder _Yellow Frigate_,
and the _Queen Margaret_ to boot; I have every seaman in Leith and
Dundee.  Faith!  I would not lie in the hosen of him who wronged the
son of Andrew Barton; but to let these lordlings get the weathergage
of me and Davie Falconer--Hailes and Home--two varlets only fit for
carrying powder or wringing wet swabs--no, no, Effie, it never shall
be!"

"But alack! they are both brave and determined."

"Likely enough--brave fellows in smooth water; but I'll teach them
how to dip their spoons in the captain's mess; by St. Mary I will!"

Euphemia Drummond threw herself upon his breast and wept, as she
said--

"Surely, they will never have the evil heart to take me from thee?
Oh, were my uncle the dean, or our good friend the old bishop here,
they dared not even to think of it."

"But your uncle the dean is attending a chapter at Dunblane, and our
good friend the bishop is drinking King Henry's sack in London Tower,
to which he has been wantonly conveyed a prisoner, by those same
Englishmen who quite as wantonly slew my poor father on the open
seas.  But some one approaches--'tis thy father, Effie; leave me to
speak with him on this matter--for a moment only, my sweet one."

As the old lord raised the arras at one end of the apartment and
entered, his eldest daughter retired by a door at the other; and
Robert Barton, while his heart swelled with sorrow and honest
indignation, approached with a lowering brow the father of the girl
he loved, and one whom until now he had ever esteemed is a dear and
venerable friend.

"Good my lord," said he, "I pray you to pardon me, if I intrude upon
the grief occasioned by the disappearance of Lady Margaret, by making
a humble offer of my service and assistance."

"I thank you, Master Robert Barton," replied Lord Drummond, with
something of confusion and much of stern coldness in his manner; "but
I believe that to the king--and to him only--must I look for the
restoration of my dearest and most gentle daughter."

"To the king?----"

"Ay, to the king!  I spoke plain enough.  She is the wedded wife of
his son, the Duke of Rothesay----"

"Rothesay!"

"Ay, ye well may start; but James, still hankering after those
grasping Tudors (may God confound them all!) liked not the match, and
hath had her kidnapped.  He hath dared to do this; but the act shall
cost him a crown, should I spend the last of my breath and the last
of my blood to tear it from his brow.  False king!" he added,
apostrophising the wall; "didst thou forget even for a moment that
she was a daughter of Lord Drummond?"

"Hark you, my lord; I am the king's liegeman, and deplore you should
nurse thoughts of treason, or have such words of danger on your
tongue; but still more do I deplore that you should harbour in your
heart sentiments repugnant to the principles of honour, and to the
happiness of your eldest daughter."

A flush of anger reddened the brow of the proud old noble.

"What mean you, Captain Barton?" he asked.

"Why, my lord, have you proposed to cast me adrift--I who am
affianced to Euphemia, and who love her with a true and honest heart?
Come, my lord, be fair and above-board with me; remember that our
dear Effie is my plighted wife--plighted and betrothed to me in
happier times than these."

"Pledges made in peace are often broken in war," replied the noble,
coldly, and without noticing a gesture of impatience which escaped
the honest seaman; for he remembered how anxious the conspirators at
Broughty were to obtain the king's ships.  In his ambition to achieve
this, and also obtain vengeance upon James, he condescended to
subterfuge.

"Captain Barton," said he in a low voice, "all correspondence between
the king and his nobles is at an end, and another day may see their
swords unsheathed against him.  Promise me, should this event occur,"
he continued, sinking his voice into a whisper, "that you will
contrive to have yonder war ships delivered unto such captains and
mariners as the vice-admiral who acts under his Grace the Duke of
Albany may appoint; or that you will serve the nobles--and my pledge
to you may yet remain inviolate."

"_May_?  God forgive thee, thou subtle old man, for such a cruel
alternative," replied Barton, with deep emotion, while his eyes
filled and their lashes trembled.  "I love your daughter better than
my life; Heaven knows how long I have loved your Effie, how dearly
and how well; but I also love that good king who was ever my father's
friend; and the curse of that dead father would arise from his grave
in the Englishman's sea, and follow me to the end of my days on sea
and on land, if I proved false to my allegiance.  My dear Effie!
accursed be the policy which would make thee the boon for which I am
to barter name and fame, honour and soul!"

Lord Drummond whose perceptions of right and wrong (never too clear
at any time) were somewhat clouded and warped by the quarrel of the
barons and king, against whom he now felt a deadly hatred, witnessed
this deep burst of feeling unmoved, for he had not the smallest
intention of yielding up his daughter to her betrothed, even though
the latter were base enough to betray the admiral and surrender those
great caravels, which were the terror of the northern sea, and the
flower of the infant navy.

"You will not join us, and deliver up two paltry ships," resumed the
politic tempter; "what! not even for a bride so fair?"

"No--not as the king's rebellious subject."

"So, so," muttered the lord, impatiently, "if you go from this on
your feet, you may warn James of the cloud that gathers round his
throne."

"Alas!  I will never betray your lordship.  As the father of
Euphemia, I almost considered you mine.  Heaven judge between us, my
lord, for I love and revere you still; natheless, this duplicity to
me, and this falsehood to our beloved king."

Instead of being touched by the depth of feeling displayed by Robert
Barton, the cruel noble now only feared that in his efforts to serve
that desperate cause in which he had enlisted himself, he had
betrayed too much to the king's true man, and saw at once the danger
thus incurred.  Raising the arras, he whispered to young Drummond of
Mewie, who stood without, and was in attendance upon him,--

"Summon Carnock, Balloch, and their people; they are loitering in the
hall, the street, or garden.  Tell them that this man knoweth more
than should be risked with others than ourselves.  Dost thou
comprehend me?"

Mewie, a savage-looking and unscrupulous young Celt from Strathearn,
muttered something under the thick red beard that fell in shaggy
volume under the brow of his steel cap, while he grinned and
withdrew.  Then Lord Drummond turned once more to poor Barton, who,
under the old noble's calm exterior, could never have divined the
deadly intentions of one he loved so well, but gazed sadly at him as
if he sought to gather some new hope for himself and for Euphemia.

"Then in this approaching raid, Captain Barton, you will permit that
long Toledo of yours to rust in its velvet scabbard?"

"Not if the king's enemies are in the field; but, good my lord, let
us talk of that which is nearer my heart than broil or battle.
Consider how this sudden enmity to me has filled my soul with sorrow.
Oh, my lord, to say how much poor Effie and I have loved each other
were a vain and useless task; but to reflect that the very day on
which we were to wed was named--to think----"

"Come, come," replied Drummond, with a lowering brow and a grim
smile, as he heard the trampling of feet in the arcades below, and
knew that his clansman, Mewie, and others were assembling there;
"this may not be; Cupid must not shoot his shafts amid a civil war,
nor Hymen light his torch at the flame of burning towns.  We can have
no dalliance now; the dame to her bower, and the knight to his
saddle.  If, Robert Barton, thou wilt deliver up Sir Andrew Wood and
the king's ships to the governor of Broughty, thou mayst yet have thy
bride; to not, seek a mate in another nest than the house of
Drummond, and as its foe, _gang warily_.  Fare ye well, sir,--ha! ha!
my daughters shall wed with new made earls."

"'Tis true, my lord, I am no noble, and consequently I am the better
Scotsman; but I believe I am rich enough to please even you.  My
father has left me a fair estate upon the Forth and Almond, where the
land is so fertile that, as the old rhyme says,

  "A rood of land on links of Forth
  Is worth an earldom in the north."


"I care not," replied Lord Drummond, doggedly; "thou shalt never have
daughter of mine, wert thou rich as James III., and rumour says his
black chest in the castle of Edinburgh is brimming with ingots and
precious stones.  I will not wed a Drummond to the son of a merchant
trader."

"My Lord,"--Barton began, proudly--

"Nay, nay," interrupted the old lord, impatiently; "get thee some
huckster lass about the timber holfe, at Leith; she will better suit
old Barton's son than will a daughter of the Steward of Strathearn."

At this gross speech Barton grew deadly pale, and laid a hand on his
sword, but immediately relinquished it, saying with calmness,

"No insult will tempt me to forget that you are the father of my dear
Euphemia; that your hairs are grey as my poor father's were; and more
than all, that (alas!) you loved me once!"

"Zounds, fellow, I shall lose all patience!" replied the lord,
angrily, for, in truth, he felt ashamed of himself, and wished to be
worked up into a passion.  "Wouldst thou place thyself in competition
with the Lord Home, the son of the Hereditary Bailie of Coldinghome,
or with the Lord Hailes, the son of that gallant peer who slew the
Lieutenant-general of England at the battle of Sark, and won that
glorious day for Scotland?"

"The son of Sir Andrew Barton may compete with any man!  True, _he_
began life as a poor ship-boy and skipper's varlet; but he died a
knight and Laird of Barnton.  Woe to both Home and Hailes, if they
come within arm's-length of me; some day I may overhaul them, and
show them the foretop with a vengeance!  Farewell, my lord; when next
we meet I will not trouble you with entreaties even for your
daughter; and so, till then, God keep you."

Barton bowed, and with a heart swollen almost to bursting with rage
and grief, and a brain that seemed to swim under the influence of his
conflicting emotions, he staggered from the chamber, and descended
unattended to the outer-door, and with all the aspect of a man
flushed with wine.  On gaining the pavement he saw the Drummonds of
Carnock, Balloch, and Mewie, all with the holly-branch in their
bonnets or helmets, loitering under the arcades in the Fish-street,
and all well armed.  He was hurrying past them towards St. Clement's
Wynd, when some one called aloud,--

"Hallo!--Captain Barton!"

Too much occupied by his own bitter thoughts, he did not hear the
cry, but walked hurriedly on.

"Dost thou not hear us, rascal?" cried several voices.

Barton now turned to discover who was addressed.

"Ah," said Lord Hailes, who with Home and others issued into the
street, "I thought he would know we meant _him_."

"Villain!" said Barton, unsheathing his sword, and trembling with a
terrible joy; "what mean you by this?"

"By the black rood, my fine fellow, but your tone is high for a
skipper of Leith!" said Home.

"It is the tone to which I am entitled."

"Ah, we shall prove that," said Borthwick, drawing his sword, while
his eyes gleamed with cruelty and malice; and the rest, to the number
of seven or eight, also unsheathed their weapons.

Barton did not wait for the attack but fell on bravely, dealing long
and sweeping cuts with many a thrust between.  One of the latter
ripped up the sword-arm of Borthwick, and hurled him against the wall
of a house; one of the former fell full upon the harnpan which Lord
Hailes wore under his velvet bonnet, and rolled him ignominiously in
the gutter; but the rest closed in, fighting in a circle, and
notwithstanding his bravery, skill, and that strength of arm peculiar
to all seamen, Barton would have been beaten down and slain without
mercy had not the sudden arrival of old Sir Andrew Wood, Cuddie
Clewline, the coxswain, and the whole barge's crew, armed with
boatstretchers and poniards, given a sudden change to the aspect of
the conflict.  With a stentorian shout, such as only can come from
the throats of those who are wont to out-bellow the wind and waves,
they rushed into the fray, with cries of--

"Ho for Barton!  Clear the hause here, loons and lubbers!  Ware your
gingerbread masters--Largo for ever!"

Barton, who had been driven back against the wall of a house, was
soon freed, and his assailants put to immediate flight, but not
before several severe blows had been given and received.  With the
admiral there was a tall and handsome man, who was clad in a coat of
rich gold brocade, and whose face was concealed by a salade.  This
person immediately assailed Lord Home with great impetuosity, and at
every blow cried--

"Down with the traitor nobles--perdition to the foemen of the king!"

Home met him with great resolution, but on receiving from Caddie a
side blow, right in the pit of the stomach, this great lord of the
Merse was doubled up, as the admiral said, "like a bolt of old
canvas," and stretched without breath on the causeway.

"Now that we have cleared the fairway, let us trip our anchors and be
off," said the admiral, "for Home has a hundred mosstroopers and more
in the market-place.  Away to the Craig of St. Nicholas, my lads, and
shove off!"

They soon reached the landing-place and sprung into the barge; the
oars were shipped, Barton grasped the tiller, and with the blue
ensign trailing in the water astern, they pulled away towards the
ships.  In his excitement the captain forgot his poor friend
Falconer; then suddenly the recollection flashed upon him; he turned
to address the admiral, when lo! he found that the tall gentleman
whose voice and sword had been so active in Fish-street, had now
removed his salade, and was no other than the--king!

On recognising him, the barge's crew suspended rowing for s moment,
and doffed the bonnets amid deep silence, while Barton also uncovered.

"Give way, my lads," said the admiral, smiling; "'tis his Majesty the
King, who, finding only falsehood and rascality among the loggerheads
ashore, is coming to sail merrily with us on the sea, where we shall
teach him how to knot and splice, to grease a mast, to hand, reef,
and steer, and to sleep in the topgallant-sail, as soundly as in the
Castle of Stirling.  Barton," he added, in a whisper, "the nobles are
rising in arms; the men of Angus are already mustering in the Howe,
and the barons hold conclave at the Tower of Broughty.  We are on the
eve of a dark rebellion, and as yet, nowhere hereabout could the king
be safe but on board the _Yellow Frigate_."

Barton bowed, for he had no words to reply in.  His heart was already
too full of anxieties of his own--anger, bitterness, and sorrow, not
unmingled with fear for the persecution that might be endured by
Euphemia, and the domestic tyranny to which she might be subjected.

In a few minutes they were close to the frigate.  Cuddie caught the
mainchains by his hook, and the boat sheered alongside the steps.
The boatswain's pipe was heard--the kettledrum beat, and the
arquebussiers stood to their arms as the king stepped on board,
followed by Wood and Barton.  He was then marshalled with great
formality and the deepest respect to the great cabin.

Then the royal standard, the yellow banner with the red lion rampant,
was hoisted at the mainmast-head, to indicate that the king was on
board.  On this appearing, a commotion was observable immediately on
board the _Margaret_, which lay a bowshot further up the river; her
drum was beaten and her barge's crew piped away, to bring old Sir
Alexander Mathieson, "the King of the Sea," on board the Admiral,
while all her port-lids were triced up, and the cannon run out.

The salutes of the two great ships, which fired each a hundred guns,
announced to the people of Dundee and of the opposite coast, that the
king was on board.  Hence arose that rumour, which proved perhaps so
fatal to the interests of James--_that he had abdicated_, and was
going with Admiral Wood to Holland or Flanders.  Circulated
industriously by the highborn enemies of the throne, the report
spread like wildfire, and though there were no means of travelling in
those days but on foot or on horseback, it was known with many
strange additions at the cross of the metropolis on the following
day, and it gave a great impetus to the bad cause of the malcontent
nobles.




CHAPTER XXIV.

DAVID FALCONER.

  "Then on my mind a shadow fell,
    And evil hopes grew rife;
  The damning thought stuck in my heart,
    And cut me like a knife,--
  That she whom all my days I loved
    Should be another's wife!"
                        _Summer and Winter Hours_


With the last words of Barton ringing in his ears and rousing a voice
of reproach in his heart, Lord Drummond flung aside his velvet cloak
and descended into the garden, which was at the back of the mansion,
and lay between it and the margin of the river.  Some remembrance of
happier, and perhaps of less ambitious days came over his memory; he
felt something of remorse for having so ruthlessly delivered over his
daughter's plighted husband to the violence of his enemies; but as he
had no wish either to alter the deadly cast of the die, or to hear
the clashing of the assassins' swords in the street without, he
walked through the garden hurriedly and muttered--

"I have done wrong--I have acted ignobly, and not as Robert Barton
would have done by me, or to the meanest in Scotland!  Yet I did not
tell him to love my daughter Effie--and Home and Hailes shall both be
earls, if swords and lances can make them so.  Yet--yet--tush!  I
have behaved like an old wolf.  But there was no remedy--I had
betrayed too much to him; so cold steel must seal his lips for ever.
And yet, alack! those lips have often been upon poor Effie's cheek.
No--no--let me not think of it!----But who is this?  A captain of the
king's arquebussiers--and Sybilla too;--pest! here is another lover!"

Beside the bower he saw Sir David Falconer lying upon the ground with
the scarf of Hailes (which he knew well) twisted round his throat.
The young man was not dead, but nearly strangled, and was now
beginning to recover.  Near him, on her knees in a stupor of grief,
with blood-shot eyes, and with her dress disordered, Sybilla was
sobbing.  Powerless and unable to rise, she stretched her hands to
her father, saying--

"Save him, father--save him!"

For a moment the heart of the ambitious old man was touched; he
forgot that he had basely surrendered Barton to destruction, or
remembered it only with an emotion of terror; and now he hastened to
save Falconer.  He freed his compressed throat from the rich silk and
golden scarf of Lord Hailes, and opened the collar of his velvet
doublet to afford him air; he bathed his face and hands in the bright
salt water of the firth that was rippling on the yellow sands close
by, and in a few minutes the rescued man was able to raise himself
upon his hands and look around him.  Sybilla, still kneeling beside
him, placed an arm caressingly around his livid neck, and while
glancing thankfully and imploringly at her father, placed her
trembling lips to the distorted brow of her lover, murmuring--

"Joy, joy--oh, David, dearest David, thou art still spared to me!"

"Good morrow, fair sir," said Lord Drummond, grimly.  "Now what am I
to understand by all this?"

"That your lordship--has--has saved me from a cruel death,--from a
death the coward hands of Home and Hailes destined for me--for me who
never wronged them," said Falconer, with difficulty, and at intervals.

Sybilla wept aloud, and again wrung her pretty hands.

"Hold, little one," said her father; "this noisy exhibition of love
and grief but little beseems a noble lady.  Though one of King
James's new-fangled knights, do you forget that this man is but the
son of a merchant skipper?"

Though this was said in a low voice Falconer heard it, and it gave
him new energy.  Slowly and tremblingly he rose to his feet and said--

"My lord, with your daughter's love and your esteem I could achieve
anything--Yea, I could ennoble myself,--yet both were alone
sufficient to ennoble any man."

Unsubdued by this compliment, the proud old noble made a gesture of
impatience.

"Another lover!" he muttered, stamping his spurred heel on the gravel
walk; "was there ever a poor man so pestered by three gadabout
daughters?  This will be another fellow for us to kill, I suppose."

"Ah, my lord, if you knew how I love her, and how to me her love is a
richer and a greater treasure than our good king's favour."

"The king's favour?  Umph--a poor inheritance to-day, perhaps a
poorer one to-morrow!"

"How, my lord," said Falconer, anxiously; "what is it you mean?"

"You will soon learn, for this night perhaps may see those standards
which we furled at Blackness unrolled against the king.  He who
serves James is the foe of the nobility; he who is the foe of the
nobility is also mine.  So come, Sir David, get thee gone to thy
ship, for the day wears apace, and I would not for the brightest
jewel in my coronet have my daughter seen in this unseemly dress.
Thou knowest this infernal king has stolen her sister, and that I'll
have sure vengeance; yea, by Him who preached in Jerusalem and died
on Calvary, I will!  Come madam, come----"

A shout interrupted the old lord's sudden burst of anger; bright
dresses and glittering swords were visible among the shrubbery; Home,
Hailes, and their friends, smarting with wounds, bruises, and anger,
after their conflict in the adjoining street, came tumultuously
towards the bower, for they had resolved on hanging Falconer's body
at the market-cross, in reparation of what they termed their wounded
honour.

Sybilla uttered a cry of terror; again her heart trembled and stood
still; but she threw herself with outstretched arms before her still
feeble lover, whom the ferocious assailants again recognized and
greeted with a shout.

"How now, my lords and gentlemen," exclaimed Lord Drummond,
unsheathing his sword; "would ye commit hamesücken?  Respect my
presence, my property, and authority, if you regard not the life of
this man, or the powers of the Lord High Constable?  Are the rights
of the baronage and nobility to be infringed by the nobles
themselves?  In the streets or highways slay as many as you please;
but here, even a dog's life is sacred."

"We have sworn to hang this half-strangled parasite of James at the
market-cross, and hanged he shall be!" replied Hailes, making a
deadly thrust with his sword, which was skilfully parried by Lord
Drummond, yet it passed within three inches of Falconer's heart.

"Thank you, my good lord," said the latter; "I am weak, but will
rather trust to my own limbs than to your power of protection, or to
their humanity.  Adieu, dear Sybilla, and may God bless thee, kind
one, for we may never meet again."

He staggered towards the water, and rushed in until beyond his depth,
and then struck out to reach the ship.

Like a herd of wild animals disappointed of their prey, his
tormentors sprang after him, midleg into the water; but he was
already beyond the reach of their swords.  They then hurled stones
from the beach, and two tall Highland gillies, who had followed
Balloch from Lochlomond side, strung their bows and shot their
feathered shafts after him, but without success; for, weak as he was,
Falconer was an expert swimmer, and was soon far beyond bowshot.

After all he had undergone, it was evident that he never could reach
the ships without succour; but, fortunately, the uproar or the beach
had been observed by the watch on deck; the fainting swimmer was seen
to make signals of distress; a boat was piped away and lowered; and
just as poor Falconer was slowly and despairingly relaxing his
efforts, and sinking beneath the calm glassy current of the river, he
was seized by the strong nervous hands of Willie Wad and Cuddie
Clewline, and dragged on board.

Sybilla uttered a cry of joy and fainted, just as the first cannon of
the royal salute pealed over the shining river.




CHAPTER XXV.

HOWARD AND MARGARET.

  "Lady, those hours for aye are gone.
    Our days of youth and joy are past;
  And each new year but rolls along
    To that which soon must be our last.
  Our early friendship--early joy,
    Moments affectionate and dear,
  The rules of life too soon destroy,
    And leave a barren desert here."


Margaret had now been three days on board of the _Harry_, which, with
her consorts, the _White Rose_ and _Cressi_, had been vainly
endeavouring to weather the dangerous Ness of Buchan, and gain the
open German Sea; but as Howard's evil fortune would have it, the
stiff breeze blew right ahead, and they were forced to tack and tack
again, running eastward and westward on the same line, like that
fated ship which, in the nautical legend, is ever striving in vain to
weather Table Bay.

Howard, on leaving England, had provided two attendants for
Margaret--pretty young English girls, whose names are recorded as
Rose and Cicely.  They were gentle and attentive, and did all that
their kind natures dictated to soothe the prisoner's grief, which,
after the first wild paroxysm had subsided, became a calm and settled
bitterness, sadness, and dejection; and her tears fell incessantly
for her child, which had been left in the secret alcove, where,
perhaps, none might discover it, and where its feeble cries might be
unheard till it perished; but then she remembered that Rothesay would
know and reveal the place, and save its little life at all hazards.

She was now aware of being in the power of Henry's agents, and that
she would be removed in secret, to make way for an English princess.

Howard, a gallant and polished gentleman, had visited her twice; the
first time she repulsed him with flashing eyes and wild upbraidings
of inhumanity and cruelty; the second time she heard all he had to
say in silence, remaining pale and immovable, with eyes downcast,
weeping and inflamed, for her powers of utterance were almost gone,
and despair was coming fast upon her.  Her great beauty of face and
grace of form, when united to her grief, touched the manly heart of
Howard; deep and sincere emotions of pity were stirred within him;
and soon a deeper and a softer influence began to steal into his
breast, and he muttered to himself again and again, as he walked on
the weather-side of his poop--

"By St. George, I would rather stand old Largo's heaviest broadside
than the witching glance of this fair woman's eyes!  If I could but
teach her to love me, a double end would be gained: it would win me
Henry's favour on one hand, and such a charming wife on the other, as
never a Howard had in his bosom before."

Then he longed to visit her again, and try his powers of consolation.
He descended to the door of her cabin.

"How is the Scottish dame?" he inquired of little Will Selby, one of
his pages, who remained below in attendance.

"Ill enough at heart, but pretty well in body, sir," replied the lad,
with an impudent smile.

"Pretty well, sir," added his brother, tall Dick Selby the gunner, a
strong and athletic son of old Father Thames; "especially after
parting with her loose ballast in the last night's breeze."

Howard knit his brow at this coarse speech.

"Poor little thing," he muttered; "may the great devil take this
pitiful errand, say I!  By my soul, John o'Lynne," said he to his
sailing master, or second in command, "I would rather walk over the
standing part of the fore-sheet, with a shot at each heel, than do
all this dirty work over again!"

He knocked softly at the cabin door, which was opened by Rose, one of
the attendants.  Exhausted and overcome, Lady Margaret had fallen
asleep on one of the cushioned lockers; a velvet cloak was spread
over her; one white hand, and her pretty feet in their red velvet
slippers richly embroidered with gold, were only visible.  Her face
was deathly pale; her eyelids unusually swollen and inflamed, while
their long lashes were matted by the bitter tears she had shed.  Her
rich soft hair was in disorder.  It hung half in and half out of its
gold caul, and Cicely was kindly and gently endeavouring to plait it
into braids, while its owner, her new mistress, slept.

"Thou art a good girl, Cicely," said the captain, "and shalt have a
ring of gold for this."

Though he spoke in low voice, Margaret was roused from her uneasy
slumber, and started into a sitting position.  Cicely and Rose
withdrew into the inner cabin, and their lady began, as usual, to
weep in silence, for the tears, which she had not the power to
repress, rolled in large drops slowly over her face.

"Still so sad, so sorrowful!" said Howard, as he knelt on one knee,
and taking her cold white hand in his, gazed kindly into her fine
blue eyes; "still weeping, dear madam; still those tears, which, like
your reproaches, cut me to the soul!"

"Alas! sir, what other solace have the wretched, but their tears?"

"I am but a plain English seaman, lady; I have been somewhat of a
courtier in my time, but the salt water, as it washed the perfume out
of my doublet, obliterated also the fine speeches that were then at
my tongue's end, and I may not now fashion soft nothings to suit a
lady's ear; but I speak from my heart, and with all the sincerity of
an honest purpose.  Oh! would, lady, that I could find some means of
serving you and drying those tears!  I beseech you to be pacified,
and to hope--for while life remains to us, there is always _hope_ to
bear us onward like a fair good breeze."

"If once I see your English shore, what hope shall I have then?"

"Heaven only knows what may happen before we have old England on our
lee, lady.  This head-wind freshens every minute, and you may see
that the rocks of Buchan are still upon our starboard quarter, while
the sea looks black to port."

Margaret gazed anxiously from the cabin windows, and saw the bold
coast of Invercruden half shrouded in the haze of evening, as the sun
sank behind it; she saw, also, the waves rolling in white mountains
on the Bowness, the most eastern point of Scotland, where the rocks
are so steep and the water so deep, that, in one of the rooms of the
High Constable's castle, a glass of wine has been drunk from the
top-gallant yard-arm of a vessel, as an old tradition tells us.

"If you would but land me, even on yonder stormy point, I know one
who would lay an earldom at your feet--a Howard, an Englishman though
you be."

"I would not disobey my king or betray his orders for all the
earldoms in Scotland, lady.  My father was an English lord, true; but
the English nobles are not a race of sordid slaves like the Scottish
peers, lady, ever ready to barter their country and their service for
foreign gold and gain."

"Too true--too true!" said Margaret, wringing her hands; "I feel
myself the victim of this cupidity."

"But I pray you to pardon my harshness of speech," said the handsome
Howard, with great gentleness.

Amid all her grief, Margaret had sufficient perception to observe
Howard's modulated tones, and the full, earnest, and anxious
expression of his eye, which indicated the emotion then stealing into
his heart.  At first, the idea flashed upon her mind that she would
make the poor Englishman's dawning passion subservient to her purpose
and the achievement of her liberty; but Margaret Drummond was too
artless and too honourable for such a course, and at once repressed
the thought; for there was so much of open candour on his manly brow,
and so much of kindness in his fine eyes and well-formed mouth, that
she could perceive, although _he_ was the instrument of her wrong and
misery, that he was at heart her friend, and might yet prove her most
powerful protector.  To such a man, she knew at once all bribes would
be offered in vain; and she knew that she had nothing to hope for but
from his generosity, his pity, or his love.

She gazed fixedly and with agony at the lessening shore, as the
_Harry_ stood off with its head towards the German Sea, and a pause,
filled up by sighs, ensued.

"You still refuse to restore me to liberty?" she said, while her
tears fell fast again.

"Absolutely--once and for all."

"For the first time in my life, I have received a refusal from a
gentleman," said Margaret, proudly and bitterly.

"Alas! that this unfortunate should be me!"

"But it matters not; we are still in the Scottish seas, and a time
may come when you will be forced to listen to me."

"Listen! oh, Lady Margaret! if you know the secret which is hushed in
my heart!" replied Howard, who felt her reproaches deeply.  "I do
beseech you to pardon me," he continued, in a sad and earnest manner,
"for I obey the dictates of a cold and politic king, not those of my
conscience or my heart."

"A brave English gentleman should be above being the tool even of a
king."

"Madam, I would deem myself the most ungallant of Englishmen if I
refused you anything that lay within my power to grant, but liberty
must lie with Henry himself."

"Liberty! but I am not an English subject.  Oh, Rothesay, Rothesay!"
continued Margaret, giving way to a fresh burst of grief; "what will
be your thoughts on finding that I am gone?"

"Believe me, Lady Margaret," said Howard, in his saddest tone, and
yet with somewhat of pique in his manner, "you will recover your love
for this boy prince, and King Harry may mate you to some gallant
English courtier."

"Thou thinkest me very facile," said Margaret, coldly, and with a
pout on her pretty mouth.

"Nay, lady, I only think you beautiful, gentle, good, and, indeed,
most loveable; so I crave pardon if I viewed you like a court lady
too.  They easily forget an affection; for women, alas! are very
facile--yea, variable as wind and weather."

"Many women never loved at all, sir."

"No woman ever had only one love, gentle lady," replied the seaman,
laughing.

Again Margaret renewed her entreaties to be set ashore; but she no
longer resorted to bribery, for she saw how the noble Howard was
stung when she formerly did so.  Now she appealed only to his
generosity, his courtesy, and his chivalry, and she plied her cause
with all the power and eloquence that grief inspired, but plied in
vain, though Howard became fearful that he would not be long able to
withstand her pleading tongue, when aided by two such speaking eyes;
he therefore begged permission to retire on deck, where his presence
had long been required, for the south-east wind was increasing to a
squall, and sail after sail had to be taken off the three English
ships, which were now separated and far apart.

The dangerous coast of Buchan, of Cruden, and Peterhead, with all
their bluffs, and reefs, and boiling caves, were on their lee;
half-veiled in watery clouds, the sun had sunk behind the hill of
Bennochie--that landmark of the ocean--and an angry sea was rolling
in huge billows on the stern and terrible shore.  To increase
Margaret's mental and bodily miseries, a severe storm came on, and
she had only one thought in the intervals of her sickness, as she lay
weeping and supremely wretched on a couch--one desire--that this
hated English ship might be dashed upon her native coast, and that
she might have one desperate chance of ending her sorrows--of being
saved or drowned.  She would freely have risked one for the other;
but then she remembered the poor mariners, who in that event might
perish; and she prayed God and St. Olaus the patron of that rocky
shore, to forgive her evil wishes; and, after reckoning on her white
fingers the hours she had been absent from her poor babe, and after
becoming totally exhausted, she fell into a deep, deep sleep, and was
long unconscious of all that passed around her.

The English ships floated on the chaos of waters.  With evening a
pale ashy hue stole over them, and the whole sea darkened as the
clouds lowered above it; then the wind swept past with its mighty
breath, rolling the waves like vast ridges of mountains crested with
foam, and having long dark vales of water between.

Meanwhile, Howard, an able seaman, was using incredible exertions to
weather the storm and that deadly lee shore, behind the bluffs and
peaks of which the sheets of lightning were reddening the cloudy sky.
He reduced the sails to a few strips of canvas, and lowered the
top-gallant yards on deck.  Being ignorant of the strong currents, as
the night-cloud deepened and the hoarse thunder died away, he feared
much that some of his consorts might be stranded; he could see
nothing of them, for, on hoisting a lantern at the main-mast head, no
answering signals were returned.  Every wave that swept over the
_Harry_ bore something from her deck; and John of Lynne was ordered
to cut away her two large anchors, after which she rode more lightly
over the black tumbling billows, and lay a point nearer the wind.

But the increasing storm compelled Howard at last to put his ship
about, and away she flew like the wind itself, round Rattray Head, a
promontory of Aberdeenshire; and so he bore away towards the Moray
Firth, in search of shelter and of safety.




CHAPTER XXVI.

THE CHAPLAIN'S CABIN.

  "They moved, a gallant companie
    Of stately ships, along;
  While Scotland's banner in the van,
    Led on the warlike throng."--_Ballad._


The king remained on board of the _Yellow Frigate_ for some days,
during which the rumour that he had abdicated and retired to Holland,
to avoid a new civil war, spread far and wide, from the gates of
Berwick to those of Kirkwall.  Meanwhile, the faithful Lindesays of
Crawford and Montrose, with Thomas, Earl of Mar, and other loyal
peers, were exerting themselves to raise an armed force for the
protection of James, who appointed the Tower of Alloa as the place of
tryst; and thus, immediately after the storm, the _Yellow Frigate_
and her consort weighed anchor, and bore away for the Firth of Forth.

All communication between the ships and shore had been cut off since
the king's embarkation, as the town of Dundee was full of
malcontents; and indeed there were great fears that an exchange of
shots might take place as the vessels passed Sir Patrick Gray's
garrison in the Castle of Broughty.

Falconer and Barton had no means of ascertaining what was passing at
the house of Lord Drummond; but rumour reached them that he had sent
his four daughters to his Castle of Drummond in Strathearn, under the
escort of the Laird of Balloch.

It was a beautiful morning, about the last day of May; the river
shone like a mirror, but its shores yet slept in the sunny summer
haze when the frigates weighed anchor.  The king was in his cabin,
but he heard the din of preparation for sea, as Barton gave the order
to "ship the capstan bars!"

Then, while his pages dressed him, he heard the sound of the fife and
the stamping of feet, as the sailors in their deerskin boots tripped
merrily round the capstan to the old air of "Trolee lolee lemane dou."

"Away aloft," cried Barton; "let fall."

Then the sails fell, and filled as they were sheeted home, on which
the frigate gathered way.  "Set the fore-topmast staysail--quick
there--up with it, out of the cat's cradle."

Muffled in a surcoat of scarlet cloth trimmed with sables, King James
came on deck as the vessels passed Tents-muir Point, and all the
seamen took off their bonnets, while the drummer beat a march, and
the arquebussiers gave a profound salute.

"I feel now more keenly than ever how hollow is all this pomp of
royalty," said he, as he walked up the poop with the admiral, "and
how paltry the inheritance of pride!  The poorest archer or pikeman
in any of my castles is happier than I, who to-day am called a king.
Believe me, admiral," he continued, sadly, "if my death would be a
bond of peace between my divided subjects, I could die happily!"

"And let those rapscallions get the weathergage of you?  No, no--I
would never die while I could live--never sink while I could swim,
and that I consider good salt-water philosophy.  Yet when the
death-watch _is_ piped, doubt not, your majesty, that old Andrew Wood
will be found at his post, though he would be sorry to strike his
flag before he had brought a few of these traitors up all standing at
the bar of Divine Justice.  Your majesty is only half my age--and to
think of dying----"

"Father Zuill," said James, turning to the chaplain, who at that
moment came on deck; "in this matter, what opinion have you to offer
me?"

"We should remember the words of Seneca," replied the priest, folding
his hands on his breast, and looking down; "he says--it is uncertain
at what place death awaits thee, so wait thou for him in every place.
Before old age be careful to _live_ well, and in old age be careful
to _die_ well--and herein Seneca gave sound advice."

"Alas, good priest," responded the sad king, "art thou a Scottish
subject, and yet forget that thy kings--unhappy race!--never live to
become old men?"

"But their virtues and honour survive the tomb," replied the
chaplain; "true philosophy can only be acquired by mental suffering.
There was a learned Persian who was wont to aver that he who had not
suffered knew nothing."

Here the Admiral, who had a great aversion for this kind of
conversation, which he did not understand, hailed the maindeck.

"How is she going, Barton?"

"Eight knots--clear off the wet reel, Sir Andrew."

"Keep her away a point or two to the south, and close the lee ports,
for now we are past the guns of Broughty."

"We weary thee, worthy admiral," said the gentle king; "but I pray
thee, Sir Andrew, to excuse my sadness."

Largo bowed, and reddened with a feeling of vexation, that the king
had detected his impatience.

"I am a cold comforter for those who are in trouble," said he, "for I
am but a plain-spoken mariner, who know of nothing beyond the ropes
of a ship and the points of a compass; but we sailors, though our
tongues may be less ready than our hands, have our hearts in the
right place, our anchor is hope, and the blessed gospels our helm and
compass--religion is our polestar, and loyalty our pilot."

"I defy thee, Father Zuill, to have expressed this better," said the
king, with a smile; "how many of those dog nobles who are the curse
of Scotland could say as much?"

The sun was now above the sea, which rolled like a mighty sheet of
light around each rock and promontory; the low flat shore of Angus
slept in that sunny glow, but the bolder bluffs of Fife were slowly
becoming visible as the morning haze drew upward like a curtain of
gauze.  The clear brilliance of the sea and sun made Father Zuill
think of his burning-glasses, and he invited the king (who found a
great pleasure in visiting every part of the ship) into his cabin,
whither the admiral felt himself constrained to accompany them; for,
as there were many points and features in the chaplain's studies
which he did not admire, he never entered this cabin when he could
avoid it.

Small, low, and panneled with oak, it was surrounded by shelves,
laden with books, glasses, retorts, and chemical apparatus, stuffed
animals, and various antiquities, fossils, and preparations, the use
of which the simple-minded seaman could not divine.

From one of the beams overhead hung a Roman lamp of bronze, which had
been found in the city of Camelon; and appended thereto were the egg
of an ostrich, a large amber bead, used as a charm to cure blindness,
and an amulet of green stone, the meaning of which, Sir Andrew, after
some hesitation, inquired.

"It is an Egyptian Nileometer," replied the priest; "in hieroglyphics
this was the symbol of _stability_, and as such was given of old to
Pthah and Osiris."

Sir Andrew, who did not appear to be much more enlightened on the
subject, rubbed his short beard, and ventured on one other inquiry.

"What means this black devil imprinted here on stone?"

"It is the Scarabaeus, the symbol of Pthah and the emblem of creative
power, inscribed on a tablet, supported by Serapis and Anubis."

"Fiend take me, father chaplain, if I understand all this!" said the
admiral, testily; "yet it may be all true as Barton's logbook, for
aught that I know to the contrary.  But were these persons you name
demons like he who dwells at the Cape of Storms, and by one puff of
his sulphurous breath blew old Barty Diaz on his beam-ends? or like
the sea-ape--that scaly monster which hath the voice and figure of a
man, yet is, after all, but a fish? or like the great sea-serpent
whose yawning causes the whirlpool of Lofoden?"

"Nay," said the king, "they were the false gods of the pagan
Egyptians."

"Well, I do not like having their trumpery on board the _Yellow
Frigate_," replied the admiral.  "Do they not smell of witchcraft?"

"Nay," replied the chaplain, angrily, "not half so much as these two
books behind you."

The admiral turned abruptly, and perceived two gigantic volumes,
bound in vellum and clasped with iron; they lay upon the stock of a
large brass culverin, which, as the port was closed, was lashed
alongside the _gun-wall_, or, as it is now named, gunnel.

"And what may they be anent?" he asked.

"The writings of Joannes de Sacro Bosco, _De Sphæra Mundi_, and the
magic book of Kirani, King of Persia, with the four treatises of Sir
Michael Scott of Balwearie, _De Secretis Naturæ_; his tracts on the
transmutation of metals, chiromancy, and astrology."

"Priest, I do not understand all this," said the admiral, growing
quite angry.  "Gadzooks! to me it would seem that thou speakest very
much like a sorcerer, and all this place must be well swabbed out,
for it hath a devilish odour of necromancy.  But the gunner to his
lintstock, the steersman to his helm, and the cook----"

"Sorcery!" interrupted the poor chaplain; "Heaven forbid!  Dost
think, if these relics of the olden time had aught to do with
sorcery, they would lie side by side with this holy volume?" he
added, opening an oak-bound tome, containing St. Gregory's Homilies
on the Four Gospels.  "Nay, this amber bead and this hieroglyphical
tablet would then explode like a bursting cannon."

The admiral craved pardon, but mentally resolved that, in the first
gale of wind, he would contrive to have the ship lightened of all
these strange and mysterious wares.

"Dost thou speak Latin, admiral?" asked the chaplain.

"Latin," reiterated the seaman, angrily, "how should I speak Latin?"

"With your tongue," replied the chaplain, simply.

"Thou laughest at me, Father Zuill; dost take me for a puling student
or a smock-faced friar, that I should know Latin?  Nay, when such
drones as thee were at the grammar schule, and trembling like a wet
dog under a pedant's ferule, I was a bold sailor-lad, learning to
hand, reef, and steer, and being made a man of, even while my chin
was smooth as a lady's hand."

"Father Zuill was merely about to refer to a certain learned writer,
who wrote of the secrets with which Nature is filled," replied the
king, in a conciliatory tone.  "Was it not so?"

"Exactly, please your grace; for with all his seamanship, he hath
much yet to learn.  Now, admiral, with what is the water filled?"

"Fish," was the laconic reply.

The chaplain smiled, and pouring a drop into the palm of the
admiral's hand, placed a magnifying glass above it.

"Look, now, Sir Andrew," said he.

The admiral bent his eyes over it, and lo! an unknown world of little
monsters were crawling there!

"Now, by Our Lady of Pittenweem, there _is_ sorcery here!" said he,
aghast, as he flung the water on the deck, and rubbed his hand on his
trunk hose, and examined it again and again, to see whether all were
gone.

"Nay, nay," said the king, with one of his sad smiles, "thou wrongest
our good friend; for I assure thee, admiral, there is nought of
sorcery here.  This will show thee, Sir Andrew, how unsafe it is to
laugh at anything merely because we do not understand it."

"Your majesty is right," said the chaplain, beginning to screw and
unscrew the mirrors of his warlike machine; "thus the admiral laughs
at me, because he knows not the theory of light, or the principles of
its production.  Why do decayed wood and dead fish emit a light?  You
know not; yet Pliny, who lived fourteen centuries ago, knew and wrote
of these things.  Every earthly body will emit light when heated, for
the particles on their surfaces shine by attrition, and light is the
first principle of fire.  Ah," continued the learned projector,
setting all the little mirrors in motion, and making them flash and
glitter in a very alarming manner, "if Heaven give me grace, I may
yet achieve much by my burning-glasses."

"Father Zuill," said James III., who had been reflecting that this
poor priest, in his realm of strange inventions and abstruse study,
was much happier than a King of Scotland and the Isles, "thou
mightest achieve more by striving to develop the use of the
magnifying-glass.  Dost remember what Seneca says of a crystal
convexity?"

"Yes; and of a glass globe filled with water, which maketh letters
appear larger and brighter when viewed through it."

"I pray your majesty to excuse me," said the admiral, bowing; "for,
gadzooks, if this goes on for another ten minutes, he will give me a
fit of apoplexy.  By the sound on deck, I think the wind is dead
off-shore; and as we have not a king under our pennon every day, I
beg leave to retire to the deck, and see how the land bears."




CHAPTER XXVII.

THE ISLES OF FORTH.

  "The moon was in the dark blue sky,
    And mirrored in the dark blue deep;
  The placid wave rolled noiseless by,
    The winds like babes had gone to sleep;
  While o'er the vessel's shadowy side,
    The pilot viewed the glassy tide."


On rounding that long promontory known as the Ness of Fife, the wind,
which had been upon the beam, became, of course, ahead, and as the
frigates entered the mouth of that magnificent estuary, where the
Forth, after a course of a hundred and seventy miles, joins the
German Sea, they had to tack from shore to shore, consequently their
progress became slow and protracted.  The king, who loved to be among
his subjects, to learn their wants, their wishes, and ideas, had been
through every part of the ship between stem and stern, and had heard
Willie Wad's explanations on various points of gunnery, and the
boatswain expound on seamanship and the intricacies of standing and
naming rigging.  He had been through the magazine, the bread-room,
the hold, cockpit, and cable-tier, and amid the various new things he
heard and saw, forgot for a time, perhaps, that he was the unhappy
King of Scotland.

He rejoined Father Zuill and the admiral on deck, where the former
told him many a tale and legend of the castled craigs, the isles and
rocks they passed; and amid these stories of the olden time, the
chaplain forgot his crotchets of burning-glasses and other learned
absurdities, and all who were near, drew nearer still to listen.

About noon, they were between the Isle of May and the straggling town
of Anster, with the castle of the Anstruthers of that Ilk, and all
its rough, brown, antique houses that cluster round the mouth of the
Dreel-burn.  Brightly on sea and river shone the unclouded sun on the
white cliffs of the isle, and the rugged shore of Fife, with all its
caverns, rocks, and towers, its ancient burghs, with their pointed
spires and long and straggling fisher-villages that dot the sandy
beach.  The scene was lively and beautiful; but with saddened eyes
and a sorrowful heart the thoughtful king gazed from Sir Andrew's
lofty poop on the shores of his rebellious kingdom.  The Forth shone
like a stream of lucid gold; the Bass Rock, in the vaults and towers
of which so many a wretch has pined: the Isle of May, with its priory
and gifted holy well; Anster, with the enchanted Castle of Dreel;
lonely Crail, with its Chapel of St. Rufus, and the Weem, wherein
King Constantine was murdered by the Danes; St. Monan's, with the
cavern where that martyr-hermit dwelt in the ninth century, and where
he was slain, on that day of blood when the Norsemen ravaged all the
coast of Fife, and slew six thousand persons;--all these were visible
at once, and bathed in ruddy light.

Around the ships vast droves of porpoises were leaping joyously in
the bright sunshine, and near the shore at least three hundred
fisher-boats, with all their varnished sides shining in the noon-tide
glow, were shooting their nets; and now a cheer floated over the
water from their crews, in greeting to the valiant Laird of Largo,
whose _Yellow Frigate_ was so familiar to them all.  Above these
boats the white sea-mews were flying in wild flocks, thus indicating
where the droves of herring were.

Perceiving that the king gazed fixedly at the picturesque old town of
St. Monan, with its venerable church having the walls of its
steep-roofed chancel washed by the encroaching waves, the chaplain
drew near, and pointed out a deserted path, which leads to this
beautiful fane, by the side of a little stream that rushes through a
ravine upon the beach.  By that path King David II., when in sore
agony from a wound received at the Battle of Neville's Cross, came
humbly to crave the intercession of the dead St. Monan by praying at
his shrine; and even while he prayed, the rankling wound, which had
defied the care of the most skilful leeches, became well and whole,
for the barbed head of an English arrow dropped from the scar as it
closed;--so say the monks of old.

In the days of which we write, the bell that summoned the people to
prayer hung upon a venerable yew, which stood in the churchyard, just
where the saint had placed it seven hundred years before; but once in
every year it was removed during the herring season, for the
fishermen of the East Neuk averred that the tolling thereof scared
all the fish from the coast.

In the roads of Leith the king was joined by the _Salamander_ and
several other armed ships, commanded by the admiral's brother, by
John Barton, and other brave seamen whose names are distinguished in
the annals of their country.

The western breeze blew down the Firth as the vessels tacked between
the narrowing shores, and Father Zuill or the garrulous boatswain had
a tale to tell the king of every rock and isle; nor was the legend of
Alexander II. and the Hermit of Emona who saved him from shipwreck,
forgotten; and they showed a rock where the little prince his son was
drowned, since named Inch nan Mhic Rhi; and before this story was
finished the vessels were passing through the Ferry and standing
slowly up the river, which there opens out like a vast lake, bounded
by hills and wooded shores, between which its waters were rippling in
the evening sun: but still the wind blew hard ahead, and Sir Andrew's
ships lay as close to it as possible, being anxious to land the king
at Alloa, the muster-place of the loyal barons.  Repeatedly Captain
Barton reported to him that he feared "the tide would not serve, and
the ships would run aground."

"No matter," said he; "bear ahead at all risks, and remember our auld
Leith proverb--Obey orders, though ye break owners."

Next morning, when the pale and anxious monarch came on deck, the
ships were at anchor off the town of Alloa, which lay on one side of
them, while on the other stretched a number of beautiful isles or
Inches, covered with the richest pasture, and among the sedgy banks
of these the stormy petrels yet build their nests at times.  It was
one of those hot summer days, when a smokelike vapour seems to pass
in the sunshine over the fields of ripe corn, and in that sunny haze
the hills of Clackmannan and the fertile shores of Stirling were
steeped.  The water was then deeper at Alloa than it is now,
otherwise the ships of Wood could not have come abreast of the town,
even though favoured by St. Mungo's tide, of which the crews, who of
course knew the river well, took due advantage.  This double flow is
somewhat remarkable, for when the tide appears full it suddenly falls
fifteen inches, and then returns with greater force, until it attains
a much higher mark.

Tradition accounts for this by stating that when St. Mungo, the
tutelar saint of the district, was proceeding with certain missionary
priests to Stirling, by water, their vessel ran aground, and could
not be got off, as the tide was ebbing; but the Saint prayed, and lo!
the ebb returned with greater strength to bear the holy freight on
their way; and in memory thereof, a _double tide_ rolls even unto
this day on the beach of the ancient Alauna.




CHAPTER XXVIII.

THE FIRST SCOTTISH REVOLUTION.

  "Shall I resign the sceptre of my sires,
  And give the haughty barons leave to reign?
  No! perish all before that fatal hour
  I will sustain the majesty of kings,
  And be a monarch while I'm a man!"--_Runnamede_, Act 4.


It was the meridian of the 1st of June, 1488.

Partial gleams of sunlight fell or died away and flashed again
alternately on the ancient town and still more ancient tower of
Alloa, the stronghold of the Erskines, which crowns those strata of
rock that lie between the fertile carse and the higher grounds, and
break off abruptly above the harbour.  The narrow and irregular
streets of this picturesque little burgh were clustered round the
strong donjon, the walls of which are eleven feet thick, and more
than ninety feet high, and had often in Scotland's braver times
repelled the chivalry of the first Plantagenets.  A few crayers and
barks, with their brown pitched sides and browner sails, were lying
beside the rough stone quay that forms the pow or creek into which a
rivulet flows.

The old lime-trees and venerable avenues of hedge, closely clipped in
the French fashion, were in thick foliage around the old grey walls;
the tide was full, and the Forth ran slowly past, still, calm, and
waveless, as, with an imperceptible motion, the tall ships of Sir
Andrew Wood warped close towards the town.

The gleam of arms was seen in the quaint old streets; steel helmets
and cuirasses glittered on the quay, for armed men were watching the
approaching ships, and a blue banner with a pale sable was unfurled
on the tower, where Thomas, ninth Lord Erskine and second Earl of
Mar, a loyal and irreproachable noble, with a numerous band of
men-at-arms, drawn from his barony of Alloa, his forestry of
Clackmannan, his estates of Nisbet, Pit-arrow, and Newton, awaited
the landing of the king.

The nobles were everywhere rising in arms, and repairing to various
muster-places, some for the king, but many more to fight for Angus,
and against the court, in vindication of their imaginary rights and
assumed privileges; while the hearts of the people, like their
liberties, were oppressed and cast down.

It was a peculiarly close and sultry mouth, the June of 1488 and on
this day in particular the air was breathless, hot, and still.
Lowering thunderclouds, through the openings of which; the sunlight
shot in sickly flakes, obscured the summer sky.  Omens of evil
preceded the coming civil war.  In the fertile carse of Gowrie the
peasantry had observed numbers of field-mice lying dead about the
footpaths among the ripening corn--dead without any apparent cause.

A wonderful scorpion had been killed in the jousting haugh of
Linlithgow; and a terrible comet--men called it a fiery
dragon--passed over the Castle of Rothesay, from whence it was
visible between the Polestar and the Pleiads, and for three nights
this source of terror floated in the darkened sky.  The stone unicorn
on the cross of Stirling uttered a cry at midnight; the shadowy
figures of armed knights were seen to encounter on the battleground
where Wallace defeated the army of Edward I., under the brow of the
Abbey Craig; the helmeted or hooded fish, called monachi marini,
which never appear in the Scottish seas but as the presage of some
terrible event, were seen to swarm in the firths and bays; and, to
his great dismay, Jamie Gair had thrice netted an entire shoal of
them.  The minds of the people (naturally and constitutionally
superstitious) became filled with the most dire forebodings of the
great events that were at hand; and on the hearts of none did these
omens fall more heavily than those of the two sisters, Euphemia and
Sybilla Drummond, who were secluded in their father's solitary Castle
of Drummond, where no tidings reached them of their missing Margaret,
and where they could only hear vague and flying rumours of the great
events which then convulsed the kingdom.

Their father's words when he left Strathearn for the insurgent camp
had made them aware only of two things:--that he would fight to the
death against the false king who had carried off his favourite
daughter, and that _they_--on the rout of James's forces and the
destruction of his favourite courtiers--should become, one Countess
of Hailes, and the other Countess of Home, or he would never see
their faces more.

At this time, it was not exactly known by the king and his court
where the malcontent nobles held their tryst, or where the crown
prince of Scotland was.  Some said they were in Stirling with Sir
James Shaw; others said, at Linlithgow; and many asserted they had
retired as far off as the Douglasses' Castle of Thrave, in the wild
and distant province of Galloway.

Many loyal and gallant gentlemen were now flocking to the royal
standard with all the armed men they could muster; and with his most
faithful adherents, James held a solemn conclave, or council of war,
in the hall of the Castle of Alloa.  On this occasion he was
accompanied by the old admiral, by Sir Mathieson, Captains Barton and
Falconer, than whom there were none present more eager to meet the
insurgent lords in battle, that they might have an opportunity of
avenging on Home and Hailes their late atrocities at Dundee.  There,
too, were Sir William Knollis, the preceptor of the Scottish knights
of Rhodez; the old Marshal de Concressault; and young Ramsay Lord of
Bothwell, with many gentlemen of his band--the Royal Guard--who wore
the king's livery--red doublets, faced and slashed with yellow.
These crowded around James, and on their glittering arms and excited
faces the sunlight fell ill deep broad flakes of hazy radiance,
through the grated windows of the old Gothic hall.

The sadness and dejection of James were apparent to all, as the noble
Earl of Mar, the captain of Dunbarton--a peer whose family stood
proudly pre-eminent in the annals of Scottish loyalty--conducted him
to a chair on a dais at the end of the hall, over which hung a
crimson cloth of state.

"On this unhappy day," said the Earl, "your majesty is more welcome
to my house of Alloa than if you came to me flushed with the triumph
of a hundred battles."

"I thank you kindly, my Lord of Mar," said he; "you are one of the
few who know that through life I have struggled against an untoward
and unhappy fate--or, as it would seem, an irrevocable destiny, which
I can neither conquer nor avoid.  Gladly would I change my father's
crown for a shepherd's bonnet, and this lofty place for the sphere of
those happy peasants who, in their narrow world, seem to pass through
life without meeting an obstacle, simply because they are without
ambition, and have few enemies.  I never knew that the poor could be
so happy till within these last few days which I spent among the
brave hearts of good Sir Andrew's frigate."

"Hard work maketh a light heart at times," said the admiral, as his
eyes glistened; "and I can assure your majesty, that never shipmate
of mine would turn landsman again, to be bearded by every painted
baron, and bullied by every cock-laird and cow-baillie whom he met at
kirk or market."

"Are there no tidings yet of Rothesay?" asked James.

"None on which we can rely," replied the Earl of Mar.

"Or of Angus?"

"A body of horsemen, supposed to be his, marched eastward through the
Torwood two days ago," replied the Duke of Montrose; "but whether
bound for Edinburgh, or home to Galloway, no man can say; but the
loyal nobles are gathering fast, and seven are now in waiting to pay
their duty to your majesty."

"Seven--only seven, of all the peers of Scotland!"

"But seven is a fortunate number," said Father Zuill; "and even may
prevail, when thirty might fail."

"Admit them at once, Earl of Mar," said James, "for this is not a
time when a king of Scotland can trifle with his friends."

Marshalled by ushers, preceded by pages, and followed by esquires
bearing their swords and helmets, there now entered seven nobles, all
of whom the king knew well, and now they were the more welcome that
they came completely armed.  Among them were--Alexander, Earl of
Glencairn, a Lord of the Privy Council, who had fought for James
against the nobles in the Raid of Blackness; the aged Earl of
Menteith, who in his youth had been a hostage for James I.; the Lords
Graham, Ruthven, Semple, Forbess, and Gray, the High Sheriff of
Forfar--a cousin of Sir Patrick, the infamous Governor of Broughty.

Though all unlettered and ignorant of scholarcraft as the most humble
peasant of their time, all these lords had a high and noble
bearing--for the age was one when pride of birth and long descent,
with high military renown, were valued more than life; and, moreover,
they were all hardy, strong, and athletic--browned by exercise,
hunting, and hosting, and inured to war by the incessant feuds of the
clans; thus, they wore their globular cuirasses, large elbow plates,
and immense angular tuilles, or thigh-pieces, as easily as if they
were garments of the softest silk.  James rose up to welcome them,
and each in succession knelt to kiss his hand.

"Welcome, my lords," said he; "what tidings bring you of our friends
and foes?"

"I have brought your majesty three thousand good infantry from
Cunninghame and Kyle," said Glencairn; "the same brave men who won me
a coronet on the field of Blackness."

"A thousand thanks, brave Cunninghame!  And thou, Ruthven?"

"A thousand and three brave fellows on horseback, all armed with
morion, jack, and spear."

"And I, fifteen hundred archers and claymores," said the Lord
Forbess, a weather-beaten and long-bearded noble, who wore the
ancient Celtic lurich, with a plaid of his green clan-tartan,
fastened by a silver brooch, upon his left shoulder; "I would they
were as many thousands, to conquer or die in this good cause!"

All had a good report to make of their vassalage, and the king's
spirit rose on finding, by computation, that these faithful peers had
marched to Alloa somewhere about thirty thousand horse and foot, with
many Highland archers; but these forces had very few cannon, and the
only arquebussiers on whom they could rely were those of Sir Andrew
Wood's ships.

"Montrose," said he, "mount messengers and despatch letters to those
lairds who are captains of the Border castles; desire them to keep
tryst at Melrose, and come in with all their lances and archers
without an hour's delay."

Montrose, whose principal scribes were the poor poets who hovered
about the court--such as William Dunbar and others--soon had the
messages written and given to gentlemen of trust, who concealed them
in the scabbards of their swords and poniards; and after being landed
on the Carse of Stirling by the boats of the _Yellow Frigate_, they
departed on the spur towards the south.

While James was taking counsel of the loyalists on what course he
should pursue, the venerable Duke of Montrose-Crawford entered again,
with an expression of gloom and dejection so strongly marked on his
face, that all the nobles turned towards him inquiringly.

"What now, my good Montrose," said the agitated king--"you have bad
tidings--but what other can come to me?  Have blows been struck, or
has my poor son been slain?  Speak, duke, for this suspense is
torture."

"I have tidings, indeed, of double evil," said the aged peer, slowly,
as if considering in what terms to impart them.  "The Earls of
Huntly, Errol, and Marischal, and the Lord Glammis, at the head of
more than ten thousand men, have crossed the Forth at Stirling--"

"To join me--well?"

"Nay, to join the Earl of Angus, it is supposed; for they marched
right under the cannon of the castle, and took their route through
the Torwood."

"For where?" asked James, growing pale.

"None know.  The prince--"

"Was with them," said James, bitterly.

"Nay, God forbid!  He is said to be with Sir James Shaw, in the
Castle of Stirling."

"'Tis well; we shall join him there, and together march against these
rebel peers," said James, with flashing eyes.  "Errol shall tyne his
constable's staff, and perhaps his head with it.  Is it agreed, my
lords, that we march for Stirling and leave the ships of Sir Andrew
Wood to guard the passage of the Forth?"

A murmur of assent replied.

"Let us to horse, then," said the king; "I would the queen were here,
instead of praying at St. Duthac's shrine, in Ross.  But to horse,
sirs; and now what ails thee, kind Montrose?" asked James, placing a
hand on the old man's shoulder, on perceiving that amid the general
bustle which ensued, the donning of helmets and buckling of swords,
this most faithful and aged noble stood irresolute, with sorrow
impressed in his eyes and upon his face.

"Allace, your majesty," said he, "there are tidings of serious evil;
the queen----"

"Is ill--my dear and loving Margaret; she left me sick and ailing
sorely," said James, clasping his hands; "she is ill, while I am
loitering here to play for a glittering bauble; she is ill, and
where?"

"Allace the day! she is dead and in her coffin!" said Montrose, as he
covered his kind old face with his hands and burst into tears.....

The unfortunate monarch was so crushed by these evil tidings, that
his heart seemed almost broken, and his spirit sank lower than ever.
His guiding-star was gone now, for she on whose advice he had ever
relied as his most faithful friend and counsellor, during a stormy
and unhappy life, was dead.

Margaret of Oldenburg, daughter of Christian I. of Denmark, Sweden,
and Norway, had been a woman of great beauty and amiability, tact and
discernment, and their marriage had been a happy one, though at first
purely political, having been brought about by Andrew, Lord Evandale,
High Chancellor of Scotland.  James had loved well his beautiful
Dane, and they had three children, Rothesay, Alexander, Duke of Ross,
and the little Prince John, styled, for a time, Earl of Mar.  For
eighteen years she had been his chief comfort amid every affliction,
and the partner and soother of his sorrows; for the gentle Margaret
had been all to him that a wise and politic queen, a dear and
affectionate wife could be.

Mistrusting even the few nobles who had joined him (the faithful
Montrose excepted), James lingered in deep sorrow another day at the
old tower of Alloa, and then resolved to join the prince, his son, in
the Castle of Stirling, there to assure him by the most solemn vows a
heart-broken man might make, that he was innocent of Margaret
Drummond's abduction, and would use every means to discover her.
After that, he resolved to shut himself up in the fortress until the
Highland clans--ever loyal and ever true--came down from the northern
hills to his succour; for now rumour said that Grant of Grant, and
Sir James Ogilvie of Lintrathen (afterwards the ambassador to
Denmark), Hugh, Lord Lovat, with many of the Forbesses, Gordons,
Keiths, and Meldrums had risen in arms, and were marching south to
defend and enforce the royal authority on the rebellious Lowland
lords.

By this time sure tidings were brought to Alloa, that the Earl of
Angus, the Lords Drummond, Hailes, and Home, Sir William Stirling of
the Kier, Sir Patrick Gray, and many others, had set up the standard
of REVOLT at the town of Falkirk, in the fertile Carse of Stirling,
where all the discontented lords and landholders of the three
Lothians, Galloway, and the Borders, had joined them, with all the
armed men they could collect; and together they formed a league,
which for strength and daring had no parallel in the previous history
of the kingdom, save the raid of the Douglasses in the reign of James
II.

Sir James Shaw of Sauchie, Gray of Kyneff, and their minion, the
infamous Borthwick, were among the most active in creating this
unwarrantable rebellion.

The ancient burgh of Falkirk, which is so beautifully situated among
the lands of the now fertile carse, was _then_ surrounded by a dense
forest of oaks and beeches, and near it lay a great morass, through
which the Carron--that stream so famed in Celtic song and Roman
war--flowed past the old Castle of Callendar, whose lords were for
centuries comptrollers to the king.  This town was then little more
than a village, and consisted merely of a High-street and the Kirk
Wynd, which led to the church of St. Modan, the pointed spire of
which rose above the antique tenements of the Knights of Rhodez,
whose preceptor possessed most of the property within the rising
burgh.  It was surrounded by a fortified wall having ports, one of
which is yet remaining in the Back Row.  Being loftily situated, and
commanding an extensive view in every direction, it was admirably
adapted for the muster-place of the rebel lords, whose whole desire
was now to lure the unfortunate king to try their strength in battle.
The town was filled by their troops; the cavalry occupied the
High-street and Churchyard, while the chiefs had their quarters in
the Castle of Callendar, the family seat of James, Lord Livingstone,
where they held council by day, and wassail by night, drinking the
comptroller's wine, and broaching his Lammas ale, "to the confusion
of the king and of his parasitical favourites."

Here they were visited by the venerable and valiant Sieur de
Concressault, who came alone, or at least attended only by three
horsemen--one who bore his banner, a second who carried his helmet,
and a third who sounded a trumpet; and, penetrating into the flushed,
proud, and riotous company, who were drinking and roistering in the
hall of Callendar, where they

        "Carved at the meal with gloves to steel,
  And drank their red wine through the helmet barred,"

the marshal boldly announced to them what he had been desired to say
by a mandate recently received from his master, the King of France.
But before he spoke, this good soldier was shocked to perceive the
young Duke of Rothesay (whom all the loyalists believed to be in
Stirling) among these dark and fierce conspirators; for the false and
subtle Shaw and others retained the heir of the crown among them, to
give a colour and pretext to all their illegal actions--or at least,
that on his young head some of the blame of revolt, and shame of
defeat, should fall.  He seemed pale and sad, and crushed in spirit;
for he now felt convinced--thanks to the reiterations of Borthwick,
Shaw, and Gray--that his father had destroyed both Margaret and her
child; and as he was one of those who think it "better to have loved
and lost, than never to have loved at all," his bitterness was great
indeed.

"Marshal de Concressault," said he, "how did the king, my father,
receive the tidings that I had left Dundee with these noble peers,
and that they were in arms?"

"He wept."

"'Twas well," said Lord Drummond, sternly; "kings weep but seldom,
and their tears are precious."

"Ay," added the grim and bearded Steward of Menteith; "and there be
some in Scotland who shall yet greet tears of blude before this wark
is owre!  But what seek ye here, Laird of Pitmilty--speak! for our
swords are longer than our patience?"

"My lords," said the ambassador, "the Kings of France and England
declare that they consider it to be the common cause of all monarchs
to protect the Sovereign of Scotland against you; for subjects must
not be permitted to give laws unto a king, who, even although he were
a tyrant, cannot be amenable to the authority of the people; for we
have yet to learn that it is from them, rather than from God, he
receives his throne and power."

All laughed loudly at this, for the "right divine" was never valued
much in the Lowlands of Scotland; but Angus, who presided, struck his
mailed hand like thunder on the table, and sternly imposed silence.

"Your king is not a tyrant, my lords," continued the aged marshal,
warming as he spoke; "nay, we all know that no lady in the land was
ever more good or gentle.  And his errors, if he hath any, are the
result of youth and evil counsellors----"

At this remark, a storm of angry mutterings pervaded the cuirassed
and helmeted assembly.

"But suppose these men have done you wrong, my lords, is it wise, or
is it noble, in a wild desire for vengeance, to endanger the safety
of the most ancient kingdom in Europe, and the honour of its throne?
These princes desire me to say, firmly and boldly, that no state can
be so pure that corruption cannot creep into it; that you, my lords
and gentles, should be cautious how ye shake the framework of the
Scottish monarchy, and shatter its government, for they are ready to
resent it; and, moreover, John, King of Denmark, Ferdinand of Spain,
Maximilian of the Romans, the Dukes of Austria, Muscovy, Burgundy,
and Brittany are ready to join France and England in punishing this
revolt; and his Holiness Innocent VIII., by the voice of his legate,
armed with full pontifical powers, will, ere long, pour the terrors
of his indignation on all who are in rebellion against the Scottish
crown."

Many a brow was knit, and many a sward half-drawn at this bold
speech; but Angus waved his mailed hand, and again the multitude were
still.

"Go back, De Concressault--go back to those false carles who sent you
here," said he; "or, further still, to all those barbarous dukes and
foreign kings, and tell them that the sacred rights of an old
hereditary nobility shall not be shared with, or trampled on, by
clodpoles and merchant-skippers, by hewers of wood and drawers of
water, by men accustomed less to the sword than to the plough and
hammer, the handloom and the tiller.  Begone, I say, my Lord of
Concressault; for if within another hour you are found within a mile
of Callendar Yew, by the bones of St. Bryde, and by the soul of the
_Dark Grey Man_, from whom my blood is drawn, I will hang you on its
highest branch, as the taghairm of victory to our cause!"

"Be it so," replied the Sieur de Monipennie, as he drew himself up
with an air of scorn and military pride, and closed the umbriere of
his helmet, as he donned it in defiance of them all.  "On a coming
day, I hope to requite this foul insult, and teach thee, Lord of
Angus, that a Scottish gentleman--a Marshal of France--is as good as
any peer that ever came of the Douglas Blood, and better, it may be."

Turning from the hall, he left Callendar with all speed, and crossed
the Carse in the direction of the Forth, to rejoin the king at Alloa.

"How happy all these titled villains will be now," said the marshal
to his esquire, who was no other than David Falconer.

"Nay, they may be _glad_, but scarcely _happy_," he replied.  "There
are our ships.  Barton sees us, and sends off a boat."

"Say nought about our having seen that madcap prince among the
rebels," said the old soldier; "for his father the king hath over
many sorrows already to thole."

The moment the ambassador left Callendar, Sir James Shaw summoned
Borthwick, who had been duly infeft in his three tenements in the
burgh of Stirling.

"Mount," said he; "mount and ride, with forty chosen men, to
Linlithgow, and thence to Edinburgh; display our banners at the burgh
crosses--rouse the Gutterbloods of the Good Town, and the Whelps of
the Black Bitch; say that the Falkirk Bairns and the vassals of Carse
and Callendar have joined us to a man.  Rouse one, rouse all against
the parasites of James! those base-born courtiers who oppress the
people--shout fire and sword, horse and armour!  It is easy to gather
the rascal mob, and raise an outcry.  Here are a hundred lyons and
rose-nobles----"

"English?"

"Ay, English rose-nobles," replied the subtle Laird of Sauchie, with
one of his snaky smiles; "scatter them among the rabble; say they are
from the good and charitable nobles--ha, ha! from Angus and from
Drummond!  Bait and draw on the _canaille_; threaten them with war
and pestilence; foretel the ruin of the burghs and the invasion of
their privileges.  Select villains--thou knowest many--harangue and
arm them; say blood must flow.  To arms by tout of horn and tuck of
drum--against the court--and the muster-place is Callendar Wood.
Say, to arms with Angus! who, like Warwick the Englishman, will
become a maker of kings and a breaker of crowns in more ways than
one.  Tell the people and the poor that they must no longer be the
stock-fish and foot-balls of the rich and noble; tell the rich and
great that the base multitude have risen for plunder and the
assumption of absurd privileges.  Here, take my sword, it is a good
Banffshire blade, and away to Edinburgh; see Napier, the provost, and
say all I have said; for the papal legate is coming, and if once he
sets his red legs on Scottish ground, the burghs are lost to the
nobles for ever!"

While Sauchie repaired to his governorship in the Castle of Stirling,
the firebrand Borthwick departed on his rebellious mission; for the
revolted peers dreaded that, on the arrival of the Legate Adriano di
Castello, who was hastening from Rome, the burgesses, and all who
feared the censures of the Church, might join King James before a
decisive battle was fought or a Revolution achieved.

The artful minion was very successful in his mission, and soon after,
the flower of the Lothian spearmen--the finest infantry in
Scotland--joined the rebel lords at Falkirk.




CHAPTER XXIX.

THE MARCH TO STIRLING.

On a glorious morning of the first days of June, James III. began his
march for Stirling, once the El Dorado of the Scottish nobles during
his reign, as Linlithgow was in the time of James IV., and Falkland
in the time of James V.

The gentle breath of the morning stole along the heather braes, and
the sound of the river was heard as it murmured on its yellow shores.
Above the hills the sun was rising in his summer splendour, and the
winding Forth blushed red as the shades of night retired.  The peaks
of the Ochil mountains glittered as the mist rolled away from their
summits; the mavis and merle sang among the woods of Alloa; but the
dew lay long in the grassy haughs and hollows, where the peaceful
shepherds, who heeded little the godless strife of lords and earls,
were winding their horns, while the colley dogs barked and yelled
when herd and hirsel came forth from bught and penn.

Though less accustomed to armour than most of his turbulent subjects,
James was attired in a heavy suit, which he valued highly for having
been worn by his father at the sieges of Thrave and Roxburgh.  It was
gorgeously inlaid with ornamental and religious devices; the back and
breastplates were composed of several pieces, to render them
flexible, and the thighs wera defended by an apron of chain mail.
Above his salade (a peculiar headpiece, first introduced from Germany
during the reign of James II.) he wore a cap of maintenance,
surmounted by the imperial crest, the lion _in defence_; while the
royal arms, the lion rampant, within the double tressure, were
everywhere emblazoned on the caparisons of his horse, the head of
which was encased in a chanfron of tempered steel.

Another helmet for battle was borne behind the king by the Laird of
Touch, who was hereditary armour-bearer and esquire of the royal
body; his standard was borne by Scrimgeour, the Constable of Dundee,
also its hereditary bearer.  The lances of the Royal Guard, under
Ramsay, Lord Bothwell, wearing over their armour scarlet jupons,
trimmed with yellow (the royal livery), rode close around, in front
and in rear of the king, near whom were Sir William Knollis,
preceptor of Torphichen, wearing the black côte d'armes of his order,
with its white cross of eight points; the old Sieur de Concressault,
clad in a gorgeous suit of Milan plate, with his orders of knighthood
sparkling on his breast, his swallow-tailed pennon borne before him
by one esquire, and his helmet behind him by another.  With this
group rode the venerable Montrose, the king's first counsellor,
attended by many gentlemen, among whom were Sir David Falconer, who,
as a soldier, had resolved to share the dangers of the campaign;
while the admiral, Barton, and Mathieson had returned to their ships
to guard the passage of the river below Alloa.

The royal army was nearly thirty thousand strong, and gathered
strength at every tower and hamlet as it marched westward, by the
margin of the Forth, towards Stirling.  There were the well-accoutred
horsemen and spearmen of the North Lowlands, in their steel caps and
buff coats, with iron gloves and gorgets; Highland archers in their
long lurichs of chain and conical helmets of steel, with short bows
and ponderous swords--all brave and determined, but unruly and,
unfortunately, inferior in equipment to the fine troops of the
revolted nobles.  The cannon were few and small, their principal one
being the _Lion_, a brass gun, cast in Flanders for James I., in
1438; it weighed 3000 lbs., and was inscribed with a long Latin
legend.

Save the hum of the marching squadrons as it rose on the morning air,
the tramp of horses, and the tread of feet, the rustle of the
many-coloured banners and pennons of baronial families, clans and
burghtowns, or an occasional word of command, there were no sounds of
military triumph accompanied this march to Stilling.  In respect for
the king's sorrow and recent bereavement, no Lowland drum was beaten,
no trumpet blown, or bagpipe gave a note to the breeze; and most of
the peers and gentlemen were thoughtful and downcast, or conversed
only in low and subdued tones; for it was an age of omens, and many
portending evils had been seen; and thus, their minds, being as it
were forewarned of unhappy results, attended to the most trivial
things, and drew from them dark and mighty conclusions.

Passing through the woods of Tullibody, the forces crossed the
beautiful Devon, which is fed by a hundred streams that pour down
from the Ochils, and rush united through a channel of rock, among
wild, romantic, and richly-wooded glens, towards the Forth.  The
royal troops passed through the little village of thatched cottages,
from the low chimneys of which the smoke of fires, that were fed with
fir and oak from the neighbouring bog, was curling high above the
rich green foliage.  The cottars stood at their doors, and held up at
arm's-length their little ones, to see the passing king, and in the
hope, perhaps, that they might catch a glance of the royal eye; men,
old and bent with age, stretched their thin hands towards him in
blessing, and the tears came into the eyes of James when, after a
long silence, he turned to those about him, and said--

"It is these poor people, and such as these, I love: and it it at
such a time as this I feel myself a king.  Believe me, my good
Montrose, the prayers and wishes of the lowly reach Heaven more
readily through these roofs of thatch, than those that rise from
baron's halls and great cathedral aisles; for, as Saint Mungo said of
old, the poor are the children of God.  I would that all Scotland
were as single in purpose and as true in heart as these poor cottars
now."

To this no one replied, and after another silent pause, James
continued, in the same bitter strain:

"How many of my forefathers have shed their blood for this ungrateful
people, who will slay me, even as they slew James I. at Perth?
Fighting for Scotland, my father fell at Roxburgh, by a cannon, in
the very armour I now wear; yet how few of her nobles have one drop
of blood for me?  Like the very demons of violence, crime, and
ambition, they will traverse all the land in arms; burghs will be
sacked, and homesteads laid in ashes; towers stormed and battles
fought, for there is no hand can restrain them but _One_, and even
that seems armed against me now!"

"Alas!" said the Treasurer Knollis, in a low voice, as he laid a hand
on the cross of his order; "alas! that your majesty should speak
thus; doth not the Holy Writ tell us, that 'man is born to trouble,
even as the sparks fly upward?'"

"Where, beyond the little band here, have I a friend?"

The Lord of St. John of Jerusalem pointed upwards, saying,

"The wisdom and the repining of man are alike folly in the sight of
Heaven."

"I beseech your majesty to be of good cheer," said Montrose; "thirty
thousand loyal hearts are under your royal banner; and another day
may see your enemies routed, baffled, and destroyed."

"Duke, I have ever heard it said that the most noble way of
destroying one's enemies was to make them friends; but in every
attempt to gain these hostile peers, I have signally failed.  Our
long projected banquet, which was to cement the bonds of
friendship----"

"For God's love, speak not of that," said Montrose, betraying a storm
of anger in his eye and manner; "for never shall I know one hour of
peace until I have discovered and nailed on Stirling cross the hand
which forged the letter proud Angus so exults in!"

And now old Stirling's "towers and town" arose before the marching
troops, all steeped in summer haze and brilliant sunlight--that
gorgeous palatial fortress, so rich in statues, ornament, and
carving--so lofty and so strong, rising tower above tower, and
rampart over rampart, on that stupendous rock that terminates the
steep on which the quaint old burgh clusters, with all its
gable-ended houses, its grey turrets, and antique courts, its shady
wynds and masses of fantastic masonry, with gardens all around, and
orchards in full bloom; while, seen at intervals, the winding Forth
swept through the fertile vale below, so rich in dark green coppice
and golden fields of corn, and teeming all with natural
loveliness--bounded by the dark and purple peaks of the mighty Ochils
and the mightier Grampians--by a thousand hills and more, that look
down on plains where Scotland fought three of her most glorious
battles.

By old Stirling bridge, so famed in the annals of the past for
pageantry and strife--so narrow and so steep, with its deep-ribbed
arches that span the river Forth, the king crossed at the head of his
troops, and for three hours they continued to defile along that lofty
gangway of stone, with banners waving, and spears and helmets shining
in the sun.  Strong walls and fortified portes then enclosed the
town.  Its eastern barrier, "a formidable arch of ponderous masonry,
sprung from columns of basaltic rock, twenty feet in diameter.  A
jagged portcullis and solid gates closed the path by night, and their
state keys of solid silver are yet preserved in the town-house."

No provost, bailies, or dean of guild, in furred gowns, appeared on
bended knee to present these keys to James as he passed through the
arched portal which then secured the centre of the bridge; and the
streets beyond it were silent and deserted, for the people were
stricken with fear and awe, as his forces marched through towards the
Torwood; for he had resolved to encamp beyond the walls, and thus
relieve the burgesses of his favourite town from the presence of the
wild and unruly northern clans who adhered to his cause and crown.

Intending to remain in Stirling until more of the Highland chiefs
could join him, and being anxious to meet the prince his son, whom he
believed to be in the castle with Shaw the governor, of whose
defection he was still ignorant, James rode up the Broad Wynd,
attended by a few of his guard, by Bothwell, its captain, Montrose,
the Sieur de Monipennie, Sir David Falconer, and others who were his
best friends, and who formed a glittering troop as they approached
the castle, which was James's favourite residence, and which he had
greatly embellished, having built therein a parliament-house, the
magnificent oak roof of which was but recently and recklessly torn
down by the British government, and sold for firewood!

As the cavalcade advanced up the hill, they were surprised to find a
strange banner--the red heart of Douglas--flying upon the castle in
place of the blue national ensign, while the gates were closed, the
drawbridge up, the walls lined by the garrison, and the cannon
pointed against them.

Glances of inquiry and suspicion were exchanged by the attendants of
the king, whose pale face was turned with stern scrutiny upon the
armed ramparts, so he ordered a trumpet to be sounded, and with the
umbriere of his salade up rode forward boldly to the edge of the
ditch.

"Is the Laird of Sauchie, my captain of Stirling, within your gates?"
he asked, in a firm and haughty manner.

"I am here, at the service of your grace," replied that
arch-conspirator, as he appeared all armed, save the head, at the
wall above the portcullis.

"Thou false traitor and mansworn subject," said James, "why am I
received in this fashion at my own castle-gate?  Do ye not see the
royal banner and the guard in our livery?"

"As plainly as may be," replied Sauchie, with the coolest assurance;
"and what of it?"

James thought of his dead queen, and controlled the gust of proper
indignation that swelled within him at the insolent bearing of his
subject.

"Am I to understand that you decline us entrance here?"

"I regret to say that your majesty surmises justly."

"Soldiers!" he exclaimed, "I am James, your king!
Lieutenant-governor, Allan Cochrane of Dundonald, arrest the traitor
Sauchie, and lower the bridge; arrest him, I command you all on your
allegiance."

The Laird of Dundonald curled up his mustachios in silence, while
Sauchie laughed aloud; but no man stirred upon the walls, though all
gazed upon each other in evident doubt and trepidation.

"Will no man there desire the prince, my son, to appear before me,"
said the poor king.

Then Sauchie answered:

"The prince, your son, is with the lords, in arms, beyond the
Torwood, and is birling his bicker in Callendar Hall."

This intelligence cut James to the soul, and he turned to
Concressault, with a glance full of reproach and inquiry.

"I could not tell your majesty such evil tidings," replied the old
soldier; "though I saw the prince, pale, sad, and I am glad to say
it, looking miserable enough, among those evil-minded lords."

"And thou, David Falconer?" said the king.

"I was silent for the same reason."

"It was kindly meant, sirs--kindly meant; but it makes the blow more
heavy to-day.  Wifeless and sonless, in one week--I may well be
crownless and lifeless the next.  Oh, who that could have a crust and
cup of water in peaceful obscurity would be king of Scotland?  One
word ere we go, Sir James of Sauchie, and answer me truly on your
soul as a Christian man, is my son in arms against me of his own free
will?"

"I know not; but the nobles, now in arms to demand justice, took him
away with them."

"Justice is in the hand of Heaven; and yet these rebel lords would
seek it at the head of forty-thousand spears."

"I know not in whose hand it may be, and care not," replied the
insolent Shaw; "but time will prove all."

"Time will also avenge thy perfidy!" said James, with bitterness;
"fie on thee, traitor; fie!  But I shall neither curse nor ban thee,
for thy father was a good knight and loyal man; and this conduct in
thee is enough to make his bones shake in their coffin in
Cambuskenneth aisle.  Foully and basely hast thou deceived me, for to
thee were entrusted alike the custody of this my royal castle and of
my eldest son; but I shall yet be avenged, and have thee rewarded as
thou deservest."

It is related that James then shook his clenched hand at the subtle
traitor on the battlement above him; and all his train made the same
menacing gesture, as they wheeled their horses round and descended
into the town.




CHAPTER XXX.

THE GOOD SHIP HARRY

  "Yest'reen I saw the new moon
    With the auld moon in her arm;
  And if we gang to sea, master,
    I fear we'll come to harm.
  They had na' sailed a league, a league,
    A league, but barely three,
  When the lift grew dark, the wind blew loud
    And gurly grew the sea."
                            _Scottish Ballad._


The evening was cold and grey; the shrill wind swept over the German
Sea, tearing the surf here and there from the crests of the murky
waves, which reflected the colour of the inky scud that traversed the
lowering sky heavily and swiftly in flying masses overhead.

Scattered far apart, three English ships are striving to make headway
against the freshening gale that blows from the east, and at every
fresh gust strains their almost close-reefed canvas as if to blow it
out of the bolt-ropes; and seizing their ponderous spars, their
intricate top-hamper and heavy-towering poops, every moment careens
them over to leeward.  Hardly they beat, and bravely too; for a
foreign, and it may be a hostile shore is lying with all its rocky
terrors on their lee, for these ships are the _Harry_, the _Cressi_,
and _White Rose_.

They dared not signal for pilots as they passed the little fisher
towns that nestle in the creeks and crannies of that tremendous
coast, which rises like a wall of rock along the northern sea; and if
they had fired guns and shown their colours, it may be doubted
whether a pilot could have come off in such tempestuous weather "It
freshens fast, this plaguey breeze," said John o'Lynne, turning his
weather-beaten face to windward; "but ere this I have weathered many
a tough Levanter, and seen St. Elmo's light lay the spirit of the
storm, as it burned blue for half a fathom or so below our maintruck,
and along the topsail-yard."

"Ay, John," responded Howard, "thou mayst have been all round the
world, and outside it too--yea, have doubled the Cape of Storms, and
yet never have seen a more dangerous or damnable coast than this of
Buchan here!"

"Should we not take a reef in that foresail and the maintopsail?"

"Nay--ouf! what a mouthful of salt water!--nay, stand on; see, the
rocks fall back and the land opens!  Ho!--St. George for England! we
may yet get into safe riding, and thank God and St. Mary we have
neither started tack or sheet."

"Or had aught carried away from truck to keel--from sprit-sail to
poop-lantern."

"A board of the forechain-plates hath been torn off; but we will
plank it anew in Scottish fir," said Howard, with a smile.  "The old
_Harry_ hath carried her canvas and shipped her seas most nobly; she
is the most manageable craft 'tween Thames and Humber, and though we
have not a dry hammock or doublet on board, we will be all right and
ataunto ere long.  Will Selby, pass the word forward for a posset of
sack, and then wear the ship round, John o'Lynne, for that bight on
the lee bow opens fast; and though I never was but once in these seas
before, I remember me of finding safe anchorage hereabout.  Get ready
a culverin, as a signal to our craft to windward, and run up St.
George's cross, but for a minute only; lest the gimlet eyes of some
wary Scots may espy it from yonder devilish bluff, as we wear ship
and make to port."

"I hear a strange sound," said Dick Selby, putting a tarry hand
behind his red, weatherbeaten ear.

"'Tis the storm fiend laughing," said John o'Lynne.

"Nay," said Howard, "'tis the waves roaring in a cavern, and mingling
with the boom cf breakers on the beach; and now we should see
Phillorth Church and sands; and lo! there they are to leeward--let
her fall off a few points--so--yare--John, yare, and bravely!"

Rattray Point, that low and dangerous promontory, with its burgh
town, not a vestige of which now remains, were left astern, and soon
Kinnaird, that tremendous headland on the Buchan coast reared its
weatherbeaten brow above the foam, where the wave that rose upon the
far Norwayn shore breaks upon its iron front; and now, as Howard
said, Phillorth opened its friendly bay, overlooked by an ancient
castle belonging to the Frazers, and its kirk of St. Modan, the
confessor of King Couran.

The _Harry_ fired a gun as a signal to her consorts, and right before
the wind they stood in between the foam-drenched promontories of
Cairnbulg and Frazerburgh, and came to anchor in the bay or roads,
where, as the high bluffs protected them from the fury of the sea,
they rode in safety.

"Thank God and St. George our anchor is down, and seems to hold
bravely too!" said Howard, as the ship swung round and everything was
furled, fore and aft.

"But how fareth this dainty Scottish dame to-day?" asked John o'Lynne.

Howard coloured deeply, and pretending not to have heard, looked
fixedly at the bluff of Cairnbulg.

"Dost thou affect her, shipmate o' mine?"

Still no answer.

"Ahoy, my captain! thou'st seen her to-day, I warrant."

"Who?" asked Howard, fretfully.

"The lady--our prisoner, who hath never set her pretty foot on our
wetted deck since that misty night we were off Tay mouth."

"How could she do so, when the wind hath blown a tempest since, and
we have shipped an ocean and more of this bitter Scottish sea?  She
is low in heart, and sunk in health and spirit--poor little
damsel--my heart bleeds for her!"

"And yearns for her too--is it not so, Edmund Howard?"

"It yearns in vain, then," said Howard, with a sigh; "for she is
impregnable."

"Faith she must be if _thou_ has failed in getting the weather-gage
of her; thou hast been kind to her as father, brother, and lover, all
in one," continued the talkative lieutenant; "and I doubt not, she
will make such a report of thee to old King Harry as may win thee a
pair of golden spurs."

"A stout fellow who wears a sword and faces salt water--a Howard
least of all--should not owe his spurs to a petticoat, John o'Lynne,"
said his captain, coldly; "but I would to Heaven she had never set
foot on board the _Harry_; and I hope its heaviest malison will fall
on yonder villanous Scots who are plotting this poor girl's ruin, and
who brought her to us--on Borthwick more than all!  That night his
face was white as our flag; but one day I hope to see it turn blue as
a Scot's one!"

Then, the coast which is now covered by one of the most thriving
burghs of regality in Scotland, was lonely and somewhat bare.  The
high promontories, the level shore, the old castle of the Lairds of
Phillorth, the older church which was their burial place; the green
Mormond Hill, with thickets of fine oak and dense clumps of
red-stemmed Scottish firs, composed the scenery of the bay, in which
the waves rolled blue and calmly, notwithstanding the storm that
flecked with foam the sea without.

For several days the gale continued, and for these days the English
ships rode at their anchors, without their crews molesting the shore,
or being molested from thence: for it happened that the old Baron of
Phillorth was marching with his chief, the Lord Lovat, and all his
retainers, to join the king's host; so that none were left behind to
guard his lady and their tower but old men and boys.  Moreover,
although Barton had been slain in the Downs, and Lord Angus had
ravaged all Northumberland, the kingdoms of Scotland and England were
rather in a state of suspicion and alarm, than of war, as the wary
Henry VII. had no wish for that event, being anxious to cement the
bonds of an offensive and defensive alliance by the projected
marriage of Rothesay with his daughter, the voluptuous Margaret Tudor.

Howard knew nothing of all that had been passing at Dundee, Stirling,
and elsewhere, during these several days of stormy and arduous
beating to windward; and Margaret Drummond, his prisoner, knew of
course no more.  She had now become somewhat composed, and ceased
alike to threaten, to entreat, and to weep, save when she thought of
her motherless and abandoned infant.

While thus compelled by the stormy eastern wind to loiter off the
Scottish coast, the amiable and gallant Howard became deeply
impressed by the beauty, the gentleness, and sadness of Margaret
Drummond; and he felt all this the more keenly, because he was too
well aware that he was the contemptible instrument of causing sorrow
and distress to one so beautiful.  Daily he resolved never more to
enter her cabin, and hourly he broke the resolution; for the charm of
her presence was too strong for his heart to resist.

Frequently in his secret thoughts he cursed the cruel and subtle
policy of his king, and the cupidity of the infamous Scottish
traitors who pandered to him, and sold for English gold their faith
and services.

At one time he had almost resolved to land her on the coast, near
some seaport town or baronial castle, and then bear away for the
Thames, and surrender himself to Henry's wrath; or to quit his ships
and seek a shelter among the wild Northumbrian moss troopers.  Thus,
fearful of adding fresh poignancy to her grief by commencing his
homeward voyage, he loitered in the bay near Frazerburgh, while the
gale moderated and veered round favourably to the north-west; while
water, wine, and provisions became scarce on board the ships; while
tall Dick Selby the gunner, Anthony Arblaster, captain of the
crossbows, who had lost an eye at the Battle of Bosworth, and others
of the crew, looked strangely in each other's faces, and muttered
under their bushy beards; and John o'Lynne, who had been gruffly told
to "haul taut and belay, and to mind his own affairs," strode sulkily
up and down the larboard side of the poop, with his hands thrust far
into the pockets of his coarse blue gaberdine, shouldering master
Quentin Kraft, for whom he had no great love or liking, and whistling
to console himself, as he sipped a peg-tankard of sack that stood on
the binnacle-head, and looked crossly from time to time at the flying
clouds, and the long whip-like pennon that streamed towards old
England.

In deep thought, poor Howard often walked quite as hurriedly on the
other side of the poop, and was frequently heard to mutter--

"Alas, for thee, Eddy Howard--thou art a lost and ruined man!"

"Ruined people are dangerous," grumbled John o'Lynne, under his long
wiry mustachios, which were always encrusted with saline particles;
"misfortune is infectious, and I would fain see the ship cleared of
this here piece of Scottish trumpery."

"And bearing away for the Nore and Thames, which we are never likely
to see again if this work lasts," added Dick Selby, emptying the
lieutenant's posset in pure inadvertence.  "St. Mary be praised, we
gave these Buchan-bouillars a wide berth, though! else we had all
found our graves in the Scotsman's sea."

"I would rather you had taken a pull at your slack jawing tackle,
than my sack posset, Master Selby," said the lieutenant, gruffly; "so
please to sheer off when next it stands here, and before you come aft
again, give one look at the Book of Good Manners."

On this day the weather was calm and clear; the wind had almost died
away, and for the first time since she came on board, Margaret had
ascended to the poop, supported on the arm of Howard, and well
muffled in rich Muscovite sables, for the muffly (or muff and tippet)
were then worn by the ladies in Scotland.  Howard dared scarcely look
his own lieutenant in the face; for now the weather had cleared so
completely that he was at last deprived of every vestige of excuse
for lingering off the Scottish coast.

Upon that coast--on the granite brows of Cairnbulg and the loftier
bluff of Kinnaird with its cavern a hundred feet in depth, on old
Phillorth with its woods, and the Mormond Hill covered to its summit
with green moss and purple heather, on the beach in front and the
flat champaign beyond, Margaret bent her sad and anxious eyes.  Round
them the blue bay shone like a mirror; but not a Scottish ship was
near.  Close by were the consorts of the _Harry_, lying at anchor,
with their yards braced sharply up and their heads to the wind, and
in the open sea without were a number of those Dutch vessels called
bushes, which, until the beginning of the seventeenth century, were
permitted by the Scottish government to fish in the Loch of
Strathbeg, which was _then_ an arm of the sea, though now it is more
than a mile from it.

Howard saw the expression of Margaret's dark and beautiful eyes, as
she gazed in silent sorrow on the shore and on the narrow strip of
water, little more than half a bowshot, that separated her from the
yellow beach on which that water rippled, and as she turned
pleadingly and reproachfully to him, he felt that his own gaze became
disordered; and dreading that she would renew those earnest
entreaties with which he dared not comply--entreaties to be landed on
any point or place from whence she could make her way to the nearest
hut or house--he begged her to be seated, and to excuse him, and
hurried to the fore-part of the vessel on some pretented duty,
despatching to her the pretty Cicely and the black-eyed Rose, who
were gaily chatting with Dick Selby and Anthony the archer, in the
waist, and in the sunny side of the starboard gun-tier, and were
looking as spruce and charming as the hideous dress then worn by the
women of England would permit; for their gowns were cut square at the
neck, with enormous sleeves confined at intervals from the elbow to
the wrist, or worn like "bishop's sleeves," as they were named in
London.  On their heads were flowing capuchons turned back, as we may
still see them in some of Holbein's portraits.

Finding herself an object of attention and considerable speculation
among the crew, who (honest souls!) knew little of the mission and
less of the object which had brought them into Scottish waters, the
sensitive Margaret soon retired again to her cabin, and there Edmund
Howard followed her, by a temptation which he could not resist--lured
by the sound of her voice, and the soft expression of her eyes; for
these, though speaking only of sorrow and reproach, were too powerful
and too seductive to be easily withstood.

Though his visit had been respectfully heralded by little Will Selby,
the gunner's brother, Howard found Margaret seated in a chair near
the cabin windows, still watching the shore, then shining in the
meridian sun.  She had thrown aside her hood, and wore only her caul
of gold, under which her soft fair hair fell in a shower of
glittering curls down her back,--for such was then, and for long
after, the fashion.  The sunlight streamed through the cabin window,
and Margaret's bright tresses seemed to form a glory round her mild
Madonna face, which was so pure, so fair, and exquisitely soft; while
the deep sadness and solemn thoughts that hovered in her heart, made
her eyes seem of a darker and a deeper blue than they really were.

She gave Howard but one glance as he entered, and turned again to the
stern windows, from whence the bright water rippled away like lines
of light towards the pebbled shore, from which she deemed herself
about to be taken as a punishment for having violated the laws of the
Church, and brought discord into the royal family.

"You have soon quitted the deck, lady," said Howard, on whose
handsome face there were impressed all the doubt and hesitation which
now rendered strange and abrupt his usually open-hearted and elegant
manner; "would not a little more of the breeze that blows from yonder
waving woods have revived you, after such long confinement in this
close cabin here."

"Not unless I was under their branches, sir, which I am not likely to
be while you are captain of this caravel," replied Margaret, without
raising her eyes.

Howard then pressed her to partake of a luncheon of preserved
strawberries, quince marmalade, macaroon biscuits, hippocrass and
orange wine, which stood untasted on the cabin table; but she coldly
declined.  He stood silent for a minute, and his heart swelled under
his well-embroidered doublet, as he leaned over her chair and gazed
upon the bright soft tresses that fell on the girl's neck,--for
Margaret was yet a girl, though maternity had given a roundness to
her beautiful form, even as premature sorrow had given a sadness to
her charming face and manner.

Of that maternity and her marriage Edmund Howard was ignorant, but
knowing that the heir of Scotland loved her, he dared not speak of
his own growing passion; for what had he to offer, compared with all
of which he was depriving her.  Yet Margaret could read that rising
sentiment in his speaking eye and kind persuasive voice, and in his
softened manner,--it fretted and provoked her.  A woman has an
intuitive or instinctive perception when a man is in love with her,
let him do ever so much to conceal it; and in the present instance
Howard was too much of an English sailor, and too little of a
courtier, to show false colours.

"For the hundreth time, lady," said he, "I beseech you to be assured
that if your fate was in my own hands, you would be conducted to any
part of Scotland you desired; and there would I leave you, though in
doing so my heart should break for ever!"

Margaret smiled bitterly, but did not reply.

"Alas, lady, think better of me," urged Howard, sighing deeply;
"think better of me than to believe me a mansworn wretch like Sir
James of Sauchie, or a sordid slave like those other Scots who have
betrayed you to Henry of England.  Lady, I see a cloud now gathering
on your beautiful brow; I am but a plain speaking English seaman
(somewhat of a courtier once, it might be); I have no wish to take
the wind out of any man's sails, but I do think, that while so many
rascals tread her soil, this same Scotland of yours is not worth
mourning for."

"And dost think I have only the woods and mountain to weep for?  Have
I not my father--my four sisters, and my----" she dared not add
"child!"

"Lady, the love of kings and princes is like foam on the sea--a thing
that comes and goes with every puff of wind, and so passes away for
ever.  Kings are but a hollow-hearted race at best; their lives and
their loves are made alike subservient to policy and statecraft; and
your Scottish kings have ever, as it were, been among breakers and
shoal water since Scotland had a name; for her nobles are a race of
hereditary traitors, such as have no parallel in Europe--men ever
ready to sell her liberty and barter her honour for foreign gold."

"Who spoke of kings or princes," asked Margaret; "not I surely,
sir--my lips never uttered the name of king or prince?"

"But your heart did, madam," said Howard, sadly.  "Oh, do not conceal
your secret thoughts from me.  My own sentiments enable me to sound
the depth of yours too surely for my own peace."

"I think, sir captain, I might have wearied you by this time."

"Nay, lady, nay; does the miser ever weary of his treasure?"
continued poor Howard, getting into deeper water every moment.  "I
count not the hours you are with me, unless to reckon how long it may
be till we are separated by King Henry, and my sun sets in a dark and
hopeless sea."

"And when will this happen?" asked Margaret, making a violent effort
to control a rising sob.

"When we drop our anchors by the Tower of London."

"Oh, thou art a wretch--a minion--the slave of servile slaves!" said
Margaret, covering her face, and giving way to one of those wild
bursts of grief which always convulsed her when the memory of the
babe from which she had been so cruelly torn, arose more poignantly
within her; "begone, and leave me to the horror thou hast wrought me."

"Madam," said Howard, with increasing sadness, "I take kind Heaven to
witness, that I seek no higher ornament than the admiration you
withhold from me; no greater glory than the love I can never win.
You have thrice held out bribes to me, as if I wore some sordid
Scottish lord or servile English clown, instead of being a gentleman
of spotless coat-armour and reputable bearing.  I have not deserved
contempt thus, even at your hands, for your presence here has wrecked
my peace as surely as it has wrecked your own; but alas! from very
different causes.  Dearly as he loves you, madam--and God who hears
him only knows how dearly,--Edmund Howard will never again ask grace
of one who has stigmatised him as a king's minion and a sordid
wretch.  I dare not land you on the Scottish coast; and I have now
but one hope--that we shall fall in with old Andrew of Largo, and
that after I have died fighting on my deck, you may be given to those
whom you love by the lads I leave behind me; though I fear much that
bold Dick Selby would rather throw a match in his magazine and blow
the old _Harry_ up, than see St. Andrew's cross above St. George's
ensign!  Farewell, madam--I will never trouble you more."

Repenting her harshness, and impressed by Howard's calm and noble
demeanour, Margaret would have called him back; but he sprang upon
deck, and summoning John o'Lynne, ordered him to prepare for
sailing--to man the windlass and heave short, and to cast loose the
courses, while Dick Selby fired a culverin as a signal to their
consorts, the _White Rose_ and _Cressi_, to put to sea.

"I will no longer act the traitor to my king," thought Howard, "or be
the plaything of this proud beauty, who wrongs me in her heart, and
treats my honest passion with the cold indifference of an
anchor-stock.  Too long have I been the laggard and the lover, and
now the play is ended!"

"Ho! for England--cheerily, my hearts!" cried the gunner, as he
summoned a squad, who cast loose and loaded a culverin; "I thought we
should have ridden in this here cove till our anchors rusted and our
cables rotted--or till the hungry devils of the Scottish sea had
picked our ribs as clean as ivory.  Ready the match! we have cruised
long enough in these here northern latitudes to wish for home again!"

The culverin flashed redly from the dark port-hole; the woods of
Phillorth, the cave and rocks of Kinnaird, and the shores of the bay,
gave back the report with a hundred reverberations, as the courses
fell and swelled out in the western breeze, when the anchors were
apeak, and the topsails sheeted home, and the white flags with St.
George's red cross were displayed from the gaff-peak and
mainmast-head, as the stately _Harry_ moved slowly out of that lonely
northern bay, and once more began to roll upon the stormy waters of
the Scoto-German sea, which broke in foam above the ghastly reefs
then known as Phillorth Briggs.




CHAPTER XXXI.

THE TORWOOD.

  "On earth 'twas yet all calm around,
  A pulseless silence, dread, profound,--
  More awful than the tempest's sound."
                                  _Lalla Rookh._


It is recorded in history that James III. made a second effort to
overcome the treason of Shaw, but in vain.  The message delivered by
Sir David Falconer and Lord Bothwell, commander of the Royal Guard,
was received with derision and contempt; and for the evening and
night the king remained in the town of Stirling, with all his troops
around it, and fully resolved to fight the insurgents on the morrow,
if they advanced against him.

Rumours of their great strength made the few faithful nobles who
adhered to James doubtful of victory and fearful for his safety;
thus, the good old Duke of Montrose desired Sir David Falconer to
bear a message to Sir Andrew Wood, who was still anchored off Alloa,
requesting him to have his boats along the beach and near the Carse,
to take off all fugitives and wounded men of either party who might
pass that way.  As the Torwood--a vast forest of primeval oaks which
covered most of the Carse to the eastward of Stirling--was full of
wolves, wild deer, and, worse than these, the hunting and wandering
parties of the insurgents, this duty was a task of no ordinary
danger; but the gallant captain of the king's arquebusses prepared
for it with alacrity; resolving, if molested, to trust to a ready
hand, a sharp sword, and a swift horse.

Accoutred in his harness, back, breast, and head-pieces, armlets and
gloves, or, as the Acts of James I. say, "weel horsed and weel
harnished as gentlemen oucht to be," with lance, sword, dagger, and a
hand-gun at his saddle-bow, Falconer quitted his lodgings in the
Friars' Wynd, near the Meal-market, and rode down the steep streets
of Stirling on his mission, just as the sun was setting afar off
behind the mountains of the Highland frontier.  He had wisely taken
from his helmet the knot of _red_ and _yellow_ ribbons--the royal
colours--which the Duchess of Montrose and her _dames d'honneur_ had
prepared and bestowed upon the gentlemen of the royal army; thus he
had nothing to distinguish him as he rode on his solitary mission,
and he could pass for loyalist or traitor, according to circumstances.

He passed out of Stirling by an ancient porte near the Wolf's Craig,
where, in the war of Donald V., a sentinel, when asleep, and been
awakened by the growl of a wolf, and started to his sword just in
time to find a horde of Saxon invaders close by; they were routed;
and to this day we may still see on the old burgh seals a wolf,
recumbent on a rock, with seven stars above it in the sky, in memory
of how the town was saved.  As Falconer gave his steed a draught of
the pure spring that flows from St. Ninian's well, a dark frocked
figure--an Augustine of Cambuskenneth apparently--was similarly
occupied in watering his nag, a stout Galloway cob.

"Good morrow, father; I hope you are come to bless the cause of the
king," said Falconer.  But he received no answer; so leaving the well
and chapel behind, he wheeled off to the left, between the deepening
shadows of the Torwood and the stupendous eminence crowned by the
town; and at a rapid trot pursued the old Roman route towards the
north-west.

This time-worn path was solitary and deserted; at such a crisis none
were abroad save well-armed men, and now all these in the
neighbourhood were within the walls of Stirling or cantoned around
it.  In the stillness of the summer eve, he heard the cattle lowing
in the Queen's haugh, where the herds of the Queen were grazing, for
the lordship of Stirling was the dowry of the queens-consort of
Scotland.

The summer moon rose clearly and brightly above the dark foliage of
the Torwood, and its silver light mingled with the yellow flush of
the western sky, and threw forward in black and bold relief the sharp
ridge of Stirling, with its castled rock, its turreted chateaux and
old square gothic spire; the wooded Abbey Craig, on which were the
ruins of a castle, with the Forth winding like a gigantic snake of
silver between thickets of beautiful coppice, and forming those green
links of rich alluvial land which, in all ages, have been so
proverbial for their pasture and fertility.  Above these towered the
lofty Abbey of St. Mary of Cambuskenneth--massive, rich, and strong,
as when King David built it three hundred and forty years before; and
lights began to twinkle in the painted windows of its church and
dormitories as the daylight faded behind the gigantic Ochils, and as
the river that swept around it turned from silver to a cold, yet
bright star-studded blue; and the mighty bell which swung in the
highest tower was tolling the hour of ten, and summoning the
Augustines to prayer, as the arquebussier rode on, and passing the
abbey and river on his left, dipped into the wood.  The head of this
great abbey was usually a powerful and wealthy lord.  Henry, the then
abbot, was sent ambassador to England a few years after the period we
write of.

As the last note of its melodious bell--which, strange to say, as yet
lying in the Forth, just where the Reformers sunk it--died away upon
the wind, and the road grew dark as the lofty oaks of the Torwood
arched their branches over it, forming, as it were, a lofty tunnel of
twined and matted foliage, Falconer thought he heard the hoofs of a
horse behind him: he checked his own for a moment, and looked back.
He saw only the monk mounted on his stout little cob, and well
muffled up in his black gown and cowl: so the soldier turned and rode
on, though it was evident that the stranger had also for a moment
checked his speed.

As Falconer crossed the Bannock he again looked back; the monk was
still in sight, preserving his distance, and pursuing at a trot, the
old Roman way.  Falconer turned to ride back and meet this follower,
who immediately wheeled round and galloped in the opposite direction
to avoid him.

"Poor friar--my harness frightens him!" thought Falconer, as he
resumed his way.  "By my faith, but these are sharp times, when
peaceful monks and men of God tremble at the sight of their own
countrymen!"

He soon dismissed the circumstance from his mind, on remembering that
it was a peculiarity of the Augustines or Canons Regular, that they
took charge of parish churches and performed ecclesiastical functions
in any place, whereas the contemplative orders never left their
convent walls.  As he passed Polmaise (or the Pool of _Rotting_, so
named from the thousands of bodies that lay unburied there after the
Battle of Bannockburn), he again heard the hoofs of the priest's cob
following closely and warily behind him.

"'Tis intolerable, this!" said Falconer, as ideas of spies and
assassins were suggested to his mind, and he remembered that twice he
had recently escaped a barbarous death.  "Come on, good father," he
cried, "come on, and fear nothing, for I am a peaceful man, though
armed, as you see."

To this the priest made no response, but again wheeled his horse to
the right, and dashed into the recesses of the Torwood.

"Suspicious, this!" thought Falconer; "and if I find thee tracking me
again, I will try the effect of a hand-gun shot on thee, wert thou
the last of all the friars in Scotland."

He listened for a time, but all was still, save some distant and
uncertain sounds that rose from the recesses of the forest and
floated in the still air overhead; but whether these were the notes
of hunting horns recalling straggling parties, or wild wolves baying
at the summer moon, seemed uncertain; so, once more he resumed his
way, and at a hand-gallop passed the manor of Throsk, crossed the
fertile Carse, turned round a link of the Forth, and descended to the
Craigward or King's Ferry, where the river is still crossed by a boat.

Here the Forth is only half-a-mile broad at high water.  Opposite lay
dusky Alloa, with its lights twinkling among masses of quaint old
buildings, and the smoke of their chimneys ascending into the pure
still air of the evening, which had now almost blended with the dewy
night.  The woods, the castle, and the town were reflected downward
in the stream, in the mid-channel of which were the _Yellow Frigate_
and _Queen Margaret_, with their consorts, lying at anchor, with all
their boats hoisted in, their courses loose, the upper portlids
triced up and the guns run out; strong watches were on deck, with
battle-axe and arquebuss, and all ready for sea and service at a
moment's notice.

Dismounting, Falconer took his horse by the bridle and led it close
down to the water-edge at the Craigward, and selecting a place where
the boor-trees grew thick and mingled with the wild Scottish roses
and the woodbine in a matted screen, over a scaured bank which the
river had scooped as if to form a place of concealment, he looked
cautiously round and listened for a moment, and all was still, save
the ripple of the stream as it flowed towards the sea.  He placed to
his mouth a silver-mounted bugle that hung at his girdle, and blew
one low, winding, and peculiar note.  It floated away over the river,
and ere it died in the distance, the shrill whistle of Archy the
boatswain was heard on board the admiral's ship--a boat plashed as it
was lowered into the moonlit water, the crew were seen to drop
lightly down from the chains, and the oars gleamed, as Cuddie the
coxswain pushed off from the carved and painted side of the high and
formidable caravel.

At that moment Falconer heard something crackling among the
boor-trees above his head.  He looked upward suspiciously, but could
perceive nothing.

"Tush," thought he, "I have scared some red fuimart or todlowrie from
its lair--yet every leaf that stirs startles me to-night."

He had forgotten the suspicious friar; but had he looked more
narrowly he might have seen that respectable personage, with his head
uncowled, with neck outstretched, with a hand behind one ear to let
not a sound escape, and with grey, malignant eyes, half starting from
their sockets, while, screened among the leaves, he bent over the
bank to see and hear what this bugle-sound, the answering whistle,
and shore-rowed boat portended--for our monk was a spy!




CHAPTER XXXII.

THE DOUBLE BRIBE.

"Sordid, mean, and miserly, he has made various compacts, he has made
a compact with pride; a compact with avarice; a compact with knavery;
a compact with ambition; a compact with contempt; a compact with
mammon; a compact with all the evil passions, and with all the
fiends!"--_Tantalus._


"Welcome as a fair wind!" said Barton, leaping lightly ashore, though
he was heavily armed in a suit of black unpolished armour, and
carried in his hand a Jedwood axe--"Welcome, doughtie Davie."

"And welcome thou, my comrade and shipmate," replied Falconer, as
they drew off their steel gloves, and shook hands, but without a
smile, for their hearts were full of stern thoughts.

"What tidings are there 'long shore, eh?" asked Barton.

"Evil enough--the lords are all in arms in the Carse, and to-morrow
we hope to give them battle."

"Would I might leave the ship and share it with thee!"

"And why not?" asked Falconer.

"The admiral----"

"True--true."

"'Tis said these lords have a hundred thousand men under their
banner."

"Rumour says even more," added Falconer.

"But rumour is a landlubber, and often lies: and the king, how many?"

"Only thirty thousand men, to my certain knowledge, but all good men
and true, and God will bless their cause.  Have any tidings of
Howard's ships reached thee yet?"

"Not a whisper--nor has a boat boarded us since the king marched west
from Alloa.  On board we hear no more than a deep-sea lead, when
down.  Would that we could meet him!" added Robert Barton, twisting
his mustachios.  "To me the opening cannon of that English fleet were
welcome as a peal of merry marriage bells.  Any message from the fair
sisters in Strathearn?"

"Alas, none! and I suppose there is no intelligence of the lost Lady
Margaret?"

"None--a strange mystery!"

"Can she be with Rothesay among the rebel lords?"

"Impossible! for Rothesay then would leave their banner.  Hostility,
despair, and old Lord Drummond's wiles alone detain the prince among
them; for Sir James Shaw, who twice to-day bent the cannon of
Stirling against the king, and also Sir Patrick of Kyneff, declare
aloud that James has hidden or poisoned her."

"I should like to meet, on clear deck or open field, an armed man who
would say so much to me!" said Barton, grasping his Jedwood axe.

"Dost think we will have a fair day for the battle to-morrow; for the
rain so bedevils our gun-matches."

"Fair--I think so," said Barton, looking at the starry sky.  "As
Archy the boatswain says--

  "When the mist takes to the German sea,
  Fair weather, shipmate, it will be;
  But when the mist rolls owre the land,
  The rain comes pouring off the sand;"

so the mist took to the sea this morning.  And now, shipmate of mine,
what errand brings thee to the Craigward to-night?"

"A message from the Duke of Montrose to the admiral."

"Well, and what is his grace's desire?"

"That, as we have, perhaps more chance of being vanquished than
victorious on the morrow, he will keep his boats along the shore
here, to take off all fugitives and wounded men, and so provide a
safe retreat for the king, who in case of reverse (which God avert!)
will be conveyed by faithful friends this way."

"So James retreats _this way_!" said the lurker overhead.

"And how shall we know him?" asked Barton.

"By the Lord Lindesay's famous grey horse, which he is to ride on the
morrow, and by a yellow plume in his helmet."

"Good," said Barton; "I shall note them in the log-book of my memory."

"Good, and so shall I," muttered the friar, overhead.  "_A grey horse
and a yellow plume_ will be readily known on the morrow."

"Hark," said Barton, as the listener withdrew; "dost thou not hear
something?"

"Can we be watched?" exclaimed Falconer, grasping the hand-gun at his
saddle-bow.  "A muffled man--one at least in a friar's cowl, followed
me to-night, pace for pace, from the Wolf Craig to the Polmaise."

"Cuddie--ho, there!--keep the boat close in," cried Barton, looking
sharply round him.  "A friar, said ye--and there is one, even now, at
the top of the Craigward!"

Barton sprang to the summit of the bank with all the agility of a
sailor, and grasping the lurker by the frock, as he was crawling
away, dragged him roughly down to the beach.

"How now, sir friar, what seek you here?" asked Falconer, recognising
the priest he had met at the Wolf Craig.

"A passage across the ferry."

"Then you are not likely to get it, for the rebels have burned the
boat, and the oarsmen have fled," replied Barton, releasing him, and
half ashamed of having shown so much warmth before a clergyman.  "Why
did you not come boldly forward and say go at once, good friar,
instead of crawling about there like a parboiled parton--eh?"

"This is not a time to venture rashly among armed men."

"The friar is right," said Falconer; "and such was perhaps his reason
for avoiding me in the Torwood."

"Moreover, I am a friend of the Lord Drummond, bound on a peaceful
mission to two gentlemen of the king's ships," said the friar, the
upper and lower parts of whose face were concealed by his hood.

"We know most of the men in the king's ships, father," said Barton,
in an altered tone; "and for whom may your message be?"

"Robert Barton, captain of the _Yellow Frigate_, and Sir David
Falconer, captain of the king's arquebussiers."

There was a pause, during which the persons mentioned gazed at each
other and then at the friar.

"Priest, thou gibest us," said Barton, bluntly; "for we are the men
you speak of."

"How shall I be assured of that, sirs?"

"Ask our names of the boat's crew, if you doubt us," said Falconer.

"It is enough--I now recognise ye both, sirs."

"A sudden recognition!"

"Well, friar, thou'st the weathergage of us, and knowest our rank and
rating now; but what would the Lord Drummond with us?" asked Barton.

"Step a little this way; what I have to tell must not be overheard,"
said the friar, drawing them a few paces from the boat.

"Sir David Falconer, you love the Lord Drummond's daughter, Sybilla?"

Falconer was silent, for the sound of that beloved name made his
heart leap under his cuirass.

"And you, Robert Barton, love her sister, Euphemia?"

"Silence, friar!" said Barton, angrily; "what hast thou to do with
this?"

"Thus much, that the Lord Drummond, the High Steward of Strathearn,
sent me to say, that if you will make the admiral prisoner, seize his
ships, and deliver them to the lords, ye yet win your brides; but
refuse, and you shall never see them more."

"Villain monk, thou liest!--the Lord Drummond is a gentleman!" said
Falconer, furiously.

"He is more," said the monk, sneeringly; "he is a Scottish noble."

"In that word _noble_ lies a world of treason," said Barton; "but he
was wise to send a priest on this infernal mission, for with this axe
I had cloven a layman to the chine."

"Very likely," sneered the monk again; "for useful and honourable men
are never appreciated in this world--they are ever unfortunate."

"Such priests as thee will be fully appreciated in the world to
come," said Falconer.

"Do not let us quarrel, sirs," said the tempter, with assumed
meekness, crossing his hands upon his breast; "I am but the Lord
Drummond's mouthpiece; and he said, Sir David, that your pay as
captain of the king's arquebussiers would go but a short way, with a
houseful of little Davies and Sybies crying for bannocks, cheese, and
Christmas-boxes."

This sneer enraged the soldier, but he heard it with apparent disdain.

"So you will not win your brides, fair sirs--yea, with as many gold
pieces each as would fill a Linlithgow firlot."

"English, no doubt," said Falconer.

"Of course," added Barton; "what other coin could pay for Scottish
treason?  No--we will not win our brides thus, but by lance and sword
will we win them on the morrow; so, base slubberdegullion, slip your
cable and sheer off--begone, or by my father's bones, now bleaching
in the English Downs, I will tie thee in thy Mar's frock as in a
sack, and sink thee with a whinstone bullet; though thou art more
likely to die with a fathom of rope than a fathom of water over thy
shaven crown!  Away; ship your oars, my hearts," he added, springing
into the boat, as Falconer leaped on his horse; "Farewell, gossip
Davie--God speed thee back to Stirling, and give us victory on the
morrow.  I will not forget to look for the yellow plume, though I
pray it may never come here on the head of a fugitive king.  Give
way, lads; we have been off a full hour by the glass;--give way for
the ship."

The boat shot off from the shore into the stream, the rowers keeping
time with Dalquhat, who pulled the stroke oar, and all their blades
flashed in the moonlight, as Sir David Falconer, without bestowing a
word or glance on the recreant friar, galloped up the slope and along
the Carse by the old Roman Way that led to Stirling.

The moment they were gone, the friar threw back his hood and
displayed to the white moon, then sailing high aloft in the clear
blue sky, the evil visage of Hew Borthwick, over the deep sinister
eyes and hateful mouth of whom a laugh spread as he said--

"Fools!  The bodachs of Angus, the men of the Mearns, the Whelps of
the Black Bitch, and the Souters of Selkirk--yea, even the canny folk
of Aberdeen--are in arms against you, and yet ye hope for victory!  I
am now a Stirling laird, duly infeft and seized with earth and stone.
Well, well! they laugh merrily who laugh the last.  A little more of
Henry's gold, and my fortune is made!  In the battle of to-morrow, a
crown will be lost and won; and I shall gain a thousand _crowns_ if I
can bear to Berwick-gate sure tidings of King James's death!  The
_yellow plume---the yellow plume_,--I shall watch for it in yonder
field to-morrow as one who is damned watches for the first blink of
redemption!"




CHAPTER XXXIII.

THE GREY HORSE.

  "I would the wind that is sweeping now
    O'er the restless and weary wave;
  Were swaying the leaves of the cypress bough
    O'er the calm of my early grave."
                                _Scottish Song._


The morning of the 11th June, 1488, rose brightly over Stirling and
its magnificent scenery.

Almost with dawn, tidings reached King James that the insurgent
nobles, at the head of a vast force, had left Falkirk some hours
before daybreak, and were on their march through the Torwood to
attack him.  The unfortunate monarch now found himself peculiarly
situated.

His Castle of Stirling, the only adjacent place of security in case
of reverse, was closed against him; while the nobles as they marched
by the old Roman road which ran through the recesses of the Torwood,
barred the only route to the capital.  Thus, in the event of defeat,
James could turn nowhere for succour but to the admiral's boats at
the Craigward, as arranged by the faithful Falconer.

He summoned a council of his chiefs--Montrose, Glencairn, Menteith,
Ruthven, Semple, the Preceptor of Torphichen, and others; and they
were unanimously of opinion that he should commit their cause and
fortunes to the hazard of a battle.  Immediately on this decision
being come to, the steep streets and old fantastic alleys and wynds
of Stirling echoed to the brattle of drums, the clang of trumpets,
the twang of Border horns, and the yelling of the mountain pipe, as
the royal troops, horse and foot, spearmen, archers, and knights--all
sheathed in mail, with horses richly trapped; burgesses and yeomen in
splinted jacks, steel gloves, and morions; and clansmen with their
long linked lurichs, tuaghs, and two-handed swords, marched past its
walls and barrier-ports, by the ancient road, which then, as now, led
towards the rampart that extended from the Forth to the Clyde, and
advanced eastward in three heavy columns, all animated by enthusiasm,
for the royal cause, and by the highest spirit and determination.

At that time the insurgents were passing the Carron, so famed of old
in our Highland songs and Lowland history as the scene of many a
bloody contest with "the kings of the world;" for there the wings of
their pride were shorn, and the line of their conquests marked for
ever by the swords of the Scottish Gaël.

The vast extent of the Torwood--the Sylvæ Caledonia of antiquity--and
all the foliaged hills that rise around the "Bulwark of the North,"
were clad in the richness of their summer beauty.  The air was laden
with perfume exhaled from the waving woods and teeming earth; the sky
was without a cloud, save where a few specks of gold or fleecy white
floated in the distant east.  The dew was glittering on everything,
from the topmost leaves of the Torwood's giant oaks to the little
mary-flower and red-eyed daisy that grew below them.  All nature
seemed fresh and bright and beautiful.  The wild violet and the
mountain roses that grew thickly by the wayside scented the air, and
its purity was enchanting.  It seemed rather a morning for a merry
hunting or hawking party, than the stern debate of Scottish civil
war; and as pipe and trumpet, with the tramp of barbed horses and the
tread of heavily-armed men, rang on the pavement of the Roman Via,
and awoke the leafy echoes of the forest, the wild erne screamed in
the oaken glade, and the cushat dove fled from the hateful sound.

After hearing mass in the Dominican church, and confessing himself to
Henry, Abbot of Cambuskenneth, the king mounted his horse amid a
flourish of trumpets.  He was a peaceful and amiable prince--one more
suited to our own civilized time than that age of blood and cold
iron; and thus he felt somewhat unused to the ponderous but gorgeous
suit of armour in which he was cased and riveted; and all uncheered
by the enthusiasm wound him, the flashing of arms, and the braying of
martial music, as the drums and fifes, horns and trumpets, of Lord
Bothwell's guard (first embodied by James II.), played merrily,

  "Cou thou the rashes greene O,"

or by the historical memories of the ground over which he marched,
for the Scottish Marathon lay close at hand; he rode silently and
moodily on, with his helmet closed, to conceal the tears that came
unbidden to his eyes, as he thought of his dead wife, his son's
desertion, the unjust accusations against him, and the coming
slaughter which nothing but his own death could perhaps avert.

"Another hour will bring us in sight of the foe," said the old Duke
of Montrose, whose armour was richly ornamented, though somewhat
old-fashioned; for his head-piece had the oreillets and long spike
worn in the days of Murdoch, the Regent Duke of Albany, and his horse
was gaily housed in his colours; _gules_, a fess checque _argent_ and
_azure_, the bearings of the Lindesays of Crawford; "and in one hour
after that, your majesty will find yourself enabled to punish and
repay the treason of Sauchie.  I would give my best barony to see his
head rolling on the Gowling Hill of Stirling!"

"Time will show, duke," said James, with a sigh.  "God wot, I have no
wish to shed the blood of my people; but I never liked this Laird of
Sauchie; his soul was an abyss, and I never could fathom his
thoughts."

"His chief friend and follower--a man named Hew Borthwick--was in
Stirling last night, disguised in a friar's frock.  This man is a spy
and traitor; yet he escaped us, and took the eastern road, doubtless
to tell what he has seen; and for all the Howe of Angus, I would not
have lost that fellow's head."

"Borthwick! have I not heard that name before?"

"Doubtless; he is a well-known bully, pimp, and brawler, who hovers
about the discontented lords."

"Is he well-born?"

"Hell-born would be nearer truth, if rumour pedigrees him right,"
replied Montrose; "but what aileth your majesty?" he asked,
perceiving the king to shudder so much that the joints of his armour
rattled.

"A _grue_ came over me," said the poor king, and Montrose was silent,
for neither were above the superstitions of the time; and in Scotland
people still believe that an involuntary shudder is caused either by
a spirit passing near or when we tread upon the ground which is to be
our grave.

A shout, a clamorous hurrah from the vanguard, announced that the foe
was in sight; and as the king, with his forces, debouched from the
Torwood, he came in view of the long array of his insurgent lords;
and Falconer, who rode with the royal guard, shook his lance aloft in
fierce ecstasy, as he thought the moment was now approaching when he
might meet Hailes and Home, singly or together, in close and mortal
combat.

The insurgents were posted at the bridge over the Carron, and were
formed in three strong columns, the whole strength of which has been
variously stated, for their exact number has never been ascertained.
Some historians have estimated them at one hundred and eighty
thousand, which is doubtless a great exaggeration.  Their force,
however, was sufficiently formidable to appal the mind of the
heart-broken king.

The Lords Hailes and Home commanded the first column, which was
composed of the men of Berwickshire and East Lothian; and Falconer's
quick eye soon distinguished the chevron of the first, and the green
banner of the second, with its yellow lion waving above the flower of
the Scottish spearmen.

With this body rode the traitor Borthwick, armed like a simple
knight, and wearing a close helmet.

The second column was composed of the fierce clans of Galloway and
the hardy Bordermen from the Liddel, the Annan, the Tweed, and the
Teviot, all clad in jacks of splinted steel, with long lances and
two-handed swords, well mounted, and ranged under the terrible Red
Heart of Angus--the banner of a thousand battles, a thousand crimes
and glories!

In the third column, led by the Lord High Constable, were the men of
the central Lowlands (under the nominal command of the Duke of
Rothesay), and in this column the insurgents had the hardihood to
display the royal standard of the kingdom.  Lord Drummond, the
Steward of Menteith, Sir Patrick Gray, the Forester of Drum, Sir
William Stirling of Keir, Sir James Shaw, who had come from Stirling
Castle, with many more malcontent noblesse, were around the prince,
as guards and spies upon his conduct.

The aspect of these long triple lines as they stood in order of
battle by the banks of the Carron, with their deep masses of long
spears that vibrated like the stalks of a ripe cornfield, their many
silken standards waving in the wind, and all their bright harness
shining in the meridian sun, as knight and noble galloped from troop
to troop and band to band, was too formidable to leave the unhappy
king the shadow of a hope that he could ever come to an amicable
arrangement with them, which he would gladly have done had his forces
been the most numerous.

He formed his little army of thirty thousand men into four columns.
The first was commanded by the aged Earl of Menteith, under whom were
the banners and vassals of the Lords Erskine, Gray, Ruthven, Graham,
and Maxwell; the second was led by the Earl of Glencairn, and
consisted chiefly of the western clans; the third was led by the Lord
Boyd and the young Lord Lindesay, who carried the gauntlet of Angus
on his spear.

The main body, in which was the royal guard under Lord Bothwell, was
led by the king and Montrose.  It consisted principally of men from
Fife, Angus, and Stormont.  In front were the Great Lion and a few
other pieces of cannon.  James III. rode at the head, distinguished
above all around him by the loftiness of his stature, the brilliancy
of his armour, the collar of the Thistle, and his towering _yellow
plume_.

On both sides all were well armed according to the fashion of the
time and country, for the Scots excelled in the manufacture of
weapons; and at that time every gentleman possessing ten pounds'
worth of land was compelled to have a complete suit of harness, with
sword, spear, and dagger; every yeoman, a basinet, steel gloves, bow,
shafts and buckler, sword and dirk.  From an early period the nation
were good gunners; they first used cannon in the war against the
English in the year 1340; and in after years the Parliament ordered
that every proprietor whose lands were a hundred pounds of new
extent, should provide a hackbut, while every hundred-merk-land
should equip two field-pieces; consequently, the nobles had plenty of
cannon in this fatal field of Sauchieburn.

As the lines were approaching each other, the faithful Lord Lindesay
of the Byres rode up to the king, attended by an esquire who led a
grey horse of beautiful proportions--one which was deemed unrivalled
in Scotland for beauty, strength, and fleetness.  "I beg," said he,
"that your majesty will accept of this steed from me; should we lose
this eventful field--which God and St. Andrew avert--your majesty may
fully trust your sacred life to this animal's agility and sureness of
foot; for if you can but keep your saddle, my favourite grey will
never fail you."

"He has been carefully bred," said the Duke of Montrose, "and
possesses the fifty-four gifts of a good horse."

"Fifty-four, duke?" reiterated the king, stroking the fiery animal as
it pressed on the powerful curb, and caracoled from side to side; "on
my faith, a goodly number!"

"Examine him, please your majesty," continued the handsome young
donor, throwing up his umbriere; "he hath a woman's breast, with a
lion's courage; the eye of a bull, with the patience of a sheep; the
strength of a Spanish mule, with the fleetness of a Scottish deer;
and the ears of a wolf!  You will find him no cutter of gowans.  Keep
his head well up, and, by the faith of Lindesay, he will never fail
under you!"

How fatal a gift this fiery horse proved will be shown in the sequel!




CHAPTER XXXIV.

THE BATTLE OF SAUCHIEBURN.

  "The king has come to marshal us, all in his armour drest;
  And he has bound a snow-white plume upon his gallant crest."
                                                      MACAULAY.


The hostile lines were drawing nearer and more near; the shouts of
the wild clansmen of Galloway mingling with the slogans of the
Merse-men, who shouted "A Home! a Home!" were borne on the wind
across the fertile fields that lay between the approaching columns.

A loud report pealed upon the stillness of the sky.  It was the Great
Lion, a ball from which made a gap in the ranks of the foe; others
followed from a green knoll on which the royal culveriniers had
posted themselves, but slowly and laboriously, for the gunners of the
fifteenth century were somewhat less expert than those of our own
day.  James gazed fixedly and anxiously at the insurgent bands.  He
was looking for the prince, his eldest son.

"No victory can come to a heart filled with dark forebodings such as
mine," said he to Montrose.

The Duke's reply was lost in the hollow of his helmet.

"No doubt young Rothesay is surrounded by a flattering crowd, all
anxious to hail him as _James IV_."

"Ah, say not so, sire," said the faithful old peer, with a sigh; "yet
such, alas, is perhaps the fate of kings."

"The fate of kings! thou thinkest so?--to see their own flesh and
blood rise in rebellion up against them," replied James,
incoherently; "yet is there not an old proverb--a prophecy--which
says--what said it?"

Montrose did not reply.

"What said it?" repeated James, impatiently.

"That in Scotland _this year a lion shall be slain by its whelps_."

The king grew pale as death, for at that moment the wind blew out the
banner of the third division of the insurgents, and above their long
lines of shining helmets he recognised his own imperial flag, with
the red lion rampant in its golden field.

"If I this day am slain, and the boy, my son, made king," said he,
huskily, "Scotland--Scotland--what will become of her?  Lord of St.
John, doth not the scripture say, 'woe unto the land whose monarch is
a child'? and my simple-hearted Rothesay is but little more in years."

At that moment a number of arrows and caliver-shots whistled past
them, and the battle began in earnest, just as the distant bell of
St. Ninian's Church tolled twelve.

The scene of this sanguinary encounter was the tract of land now
known as Little Canglar, upon the east side of a brook called the
Sauchieburn, about two miles from Stirling.  A number of
weeping-willows--called in Scotland sauch-trees--drooped over the
water, and gave a name to the place, as they did to Sir James Shaw's
barony.  The birds were carolling aloft in the blue welkin; the air
was pure, the sunshine bright and warm; the fragrance of the flowers
and bearded grass was wafted on the soft summer wind; the mavis sang
among the pale green sauches, and the cushat dove sent up its cry
from the Torwood's shady oaks.  Grey Stirling, the wooded brow of
Craig-forth and the Ochil peaks, rose on the north, all mellowed in
the summer mist; all nature looked beautiful and smiling; but herd
and hirsel fled as the brass cannon opened on the adverse lines, and
the shout and shock of the furious onset made the poor shepherd who
stood afar off on the lone hill-side, hold his breath and bend his
head in prayer--for when Scot met Scot, right well he knew how deadly
and how deep would be the sacrilegious slaughter!

The king's vanguard, which was of course composed of his own clan,
the gallant Stewarts and other Highlanders, armed with swords, long
daggers, bows, and axes, led by John Stewart, Earl of Athole,--the
conqueror of the Lord of the Isles--rushed upon the insurgents with a
loud yell, such as can only rise from a Celtic throat.  This attack
was well supported by the king's left wing, composed of five thousand
Perthshire spearmen, led by Lord Ruthven.

The Mersemen met them with their levelled lances--those pikes so
terrible in warlike annals, "six Scottish ells in length," and an
awful conflict took place; while the shouts of "_A Home, a Home!_" on
one side, and the shrill cathghairn of the Athole Stewarts, were
often turned into the shriek of agony or the groan of death, as the
lance was thrust through the Highland lurich, or the claymore found a
passage through the Lowland jack; while weapons broke and throats
were grasped and daggers driven through plate and mail, through plaid
and buff, or the swaying axe split helmets of tempered steel and
targets of tough bull's-hide like withered nutshells.

"The first charge was valiantly given," says Drummond of Hawthornden,
"launce meeting with launce; so the vanguard of the lords began to
yield ground, and was strongly repulsed."

The men of West Lothian shot showers of arrows, to which the Highland
archers replied; and for a few minutes the air was darkened by the
passing flights, while men fell fast on both hands, and pressing on,
pikemen and archers came closing up on every side with axe and sword,
till a deadly and disastrous _mêlée_ began between the royalists and
insurgents, who rushed upon each other like two torrents broken loose.

On one side was the poor bewildered king, driven forward with this
armed tide, confused, sorrowful, and irresolute, with the royal
standard borne over his head by the Constable of Dundee; on the other
was the heir of Scotland, agitated also by painful irresolution, by
remorse and shame, and also having the royal standard above him, but
surrounded by a brilliant band of nobles, all shining in polished
steel, gold, plumage, and embroidery; and towards that quarter of the
enemy's line, young Ramsay, Lord of Bothwell, at the head of the
royal guard, made incredible exertions to hew a passage for the
purpose of ridding the king, with his own hand, of as many high-born
traitors as possible.

James sat motionless on his magnificent grey charger, with this
forest of lances and sea of helmets flashing round him; and not one
blow did he strike, but kept his eyes fixed with a species of despair
on the banner of his son.

Conspicuous among the press of rebel lords and vassals towered the
gigantic Earl of Angus, mounted on a powerful Clydesdale horse, and
clad in fluted mail, his vizor up, and a profusion of beautiful
feathers streaming from his helmet almost to the crupper of his
steed.  Aloft his mailed hand brandished, with deadly execution, a
sword which for length and strength few men could wield, and he sent
his voice before him like a trumpet; thus, it needed not the scarlet
heart on his golden surcoat to proclaim the terrible Angus--the
representative of his lord and chief, the captive Earl of Douglas.

By one blow he clove the Earl of Gleacairn through casque and gorget
to the breast, and still pressing forward--

"On, on, my wild men of Galloway!" he cried; "a Douglas! a Douglas!
on, on, for I have sworn to ride through this rabble rout _red wat
shod and mair_!" (_i.e._, above the feet in blood).

"See ye the Lord Angus, with his helmet open?" cried Sir David
Falconer to a Highland bowman; "shoot, my brave Celt, with a will!"

The Gaël--a MacRobert of Struan--shot an arrow, which glanced off the
helmet of Angus.

"Shoot again," exclaimed Falconer; "'sdeath, fellow, wert thou a
king's archer, I would hang thee in thine own bowstring for such a
glee'd shot."

Again the Atholeman shot, and slew the standard-fearer of Angus,
instead of his lord.

Undaunted by the terrible aspect of this potent and herculean lord,
many knights and gentlemen of the royal army pressed over the crowd
of shrieking men and falling horses--over all the wild _dëbris_ of a
hand-to-hand combat to reach him; but the most successful was Itamsay
of Balmain, captain of the guard, and recently created Lord Bothwell.
Though young, slight, and athletic, he rushed upon the formidable
Angus, and intent only on killing him, rained his blows thick and
fast upon the coat of fluted armour, from which the sparks of fire
were driven by every stroke.

"False fool and plebeian villain!" said the disdainful Angus,
parrying the blows skilfully with his long Banffshire blade;
"methinks ye seem better used to the porridge spurtle than the
knightly sword--but die, fellow, die! 'tis the hand of an earl that
slays thee," he cried, as his long weapon found entrance under the
left pass-guard of Bothwell's armour, and pierced him to the heart.
With a wild cry he fell into the seething mass of death and life
below.  "Next time you meet me in Stirling streets, false loon, you
will not pass me unveiled, I wot," added Angus, as he pressed on,
cleaving helmets like pippins, and shredding away the tough
ash-spears like reeds by a winter brook.

"My God--my God--look on me!" cried the poor king, on seeing this
terrible episode, which, more than the thousand others occurring
round him, cut him to the soul.  Intent on avenging his many wrongs
on this imperious rebel, he now for the first time that day drew his
sword and put spurs to his horse; but a furious rush of mounted
men-at-arms, on both sides, separated them hopelessly.

These were led by Home and Hailes, who, having recognized Falconer,
though in plain armour, by the silver falcon which adorned his
helmet, and had a knot of scarlet and yellow ribbons in its beak,
pressed on to slay him; while the wretched Borthwick, with Sir James
Shaw, Sir Patrick Gray, and Sir William Stirling of the Keir,
disdaining all such humble antagonists, reserved alike their swords
and strength for the king, whom the arch-traitor, their tool, had
already indicated by the yellow plume in his head-piece; and towards
him, and him only, they pressed surely and warily on.

Falconer, by one stroke, cut the reins of Lord Hailes' horse and so
rid himself of one enemy; by another blow he struck Lord Home's
casque from his head; yet, bareheaded and half-blinded by pride and
fury, the noble pressed on, standing high in his stirrups, and
showering blows on every side.

"A Home! a Home!  By Saint Anne, fellow," cried he, "thou hadst
better been tending the sheep on yon brae side than here in knight's
armour."

"Better for you, perhaps, my Lord of Home," said Falconer, as by one
skilful thrust, full upon the tempered gorget, he shot him out of his
saddle on the heap of men below.

"_Gang warily!_" thundered a voice in his ear, and now the vengeful
sword of one whom he trembled to encounter--old Lord Drummond--was
flourished above him.

Covering himself, parrying thrusts and warding blows, poor Falconer
sought only to escape from an antagonist whom he dared not assail,
and for whose safety he would have laid down his life--for he was the
father of Sybilla.  But the fiery blood of the old noble was at
boiling heat; he had seen "this skipper's son" defeat two chiefs of
name, to whom he had promised his daughters, and a storm of feudal
pride and aristocratic hatred of the king's humble favourite was
swelling up within him, and the arquebussier would undoubtedly have
been slain, had not Drummond of Mewie, who was hewing away on foot,
with a Lochaber axe, hamstrung his horse; and as the snorting animal
sank under him, Falconer fell heavily to the earth.  His armour
protected him from serious injury, but the horses of Borthwick, Shaw,
Gray, and Keir, as these worthies spurred on, trampled him down; thus
he was stunned, and became unconscious of all that passed over and
around him.

A deadly conflict, hand to hand and horse to horse, ensued around the
unhappy king, as these four infernal spirits, followed by a thousand
others, all superbly mounted and accoutred, left the Duke of Rothesay
far in the rear; and though archers and pikemen, troopers and
knights, nobles and burgesses, pressed on with straining eyes and
noisy tongues, with swords flashing and uplifted, to kill, to
capture, or to overbear the most hapless monarch, save one, that ever
sat upon the Scottish throne, the four ruffians were ever the nearest
to him, but failed to reach him; for old Montrose, Lindesay, and all
the loyalists fought nobly in a circle round the yellow plume; and
there fell by James's side the Lord Erskine, who was slain by a
Drummond; Sir Thomas Semple of Eliotstoun, who was pierced through
the neart by a Border spear; William Lord Ruthven, the heritable
sheriff of Perth; the Laird of Innes; Alexander Scott, director of
the chancery, whose head was carried off by a cannon-ball, and many
more gentlemen, with their friends and followers.  The royal standard
was beaten down and its bearer unhorsed; the cannon--the Great
Lion--and all the ensigns were taken, and when the sun of that long
summer flay was sinking behind the Grampians, and the shadows of the
Torwood were deepening on the plain, the king's troops, overborne by
numbers, after a long and gallant conflict, gave way, and a total and
irreparable rout ensued.

"God help your majesty," said the young Lord Lindesay, as, pale,
excited, without a helmet, and with his face streaked by blood, he
took the king's horse by the bridle; "the day is lost, yet all is not
lost with it while your sacred life is safe.  No horse in the field
can overtake this grey I gave you.  Ride--ride north, and
swiftly--the admiral's boats await you at the Craigward--farewell!"

"Ay, farewell, Lindesay--a long farewell to Scotland and to thee--for
France or Holland now must be my home."

Thus urged, and knowing that alone and unattended he might escape
more easily and unnoticed, than if followed by a train, James turned
his grey horse's head towards the north, and gladly left behind that
bloody and corpse-encumbered plain.

Thousands of arrows, with their feathers uppermost, planted all the
turf around him; here the earth was torn by hoofs, and there it was
furrowed up by cannon-shot.  Men and horses, dead or wounded, or
writhing and dying, lay singly or in piles and heaps together, among
a vast _débris_ of broken helmets, torn standards, and bloody
pennons, splintered spears, swords, scarfs, and bucklers, near the
Sauchieburn, which yet gurgled placidly along under its pale green
willows, as the King leaped his fiery and unwearied horse over it,
and with a breaking heart rode towards the banks of the Forth, while
night and sorrow descended together on that disastrous field.  On, on
he rode with a breaking heart, as he hoped, unnoticed and
unknown--but hoped in vain; for close behind, and tracking him like
blood-hounds, as history tells us, were Sir Patrick of Kyneff, Sir
James of Sauchie, Stirling of Keir, and Borthwick, the apostate monk
of Dunblane.




CHAPTER XXXV.

THE FOUR HORSEMEN.

        "Look ye, sirs!
  The breath of murder loads the air to-night--
  Be watchful and be wary."
                            _Old Play._


Under the Duke of Montrose, Lindesay his son, the Earls of Mar,
Athole, and others, the main body of James's forces retired slowly
through the Torwood, by the old Roman Way, still fighting with
obstinate valour, and protracting the struggle until the long and
lingering eve of June had faded into night, and darkness spread a
veil over the horrors of the battle, when the royalists, as usual
with all hastily collected levies, retired into the mountains, and
disbanded.

The victorious lords, with the young prince still in their
possession, passed that night near the field, and next day marched to
the town and palace of Linlithgow.

The moon was shining in the summer sky, when Sir David Falconer freed
himself from the bodies of three slain men, who lay heavily and
coldly above him; rising from the field, he was able to look after
his own safety--for many of the border prickers were hovering abroad
in search of rings and jewels, or gold-handled daggers and
embroidered belts.  A body lay near him sheathed in bright armour;
its gauntletted hands clutched the earth, the vizor of the casque was
up, and the dead man's eyes glared horribly in the pale moonlight.
Between his teeth were some blades of grass, which, when dying, he
had bitten in his agony.  On his breast sparkled the diamond jewel of
the Thistle--for this was the corpse of Alexander Cunningham, the
noble Earl of Glencairn.  This brave warrior lay above the blue silk
banner of his house, charged with its shakefork _sable_--the same
pennon which his bride, fair Margaret of Hailes, had woven for his
lance in their Castle of Kilmaurs.

Most of the wounded had been removed by their friends or by the
merciful; others had been speared by the mosstroopers of Hailes,
Home, and Buccleugh; thus, thick as grain on a harvest field, the
bodies of the dead--white-visaged, and gleaming blue in their coats
of mail--strewed all the plain; but they were quiet and still as the
leafy woods or the azure sky of that sweet summer night.

Ignorant of where the royal forces had retreated, and anxious only to
ascertain the fact of the King's safety--of which he had great doubts
on beholding the number of the guard who were lying dead three and
four deep, and whom he knew easily by their scarlet surcoats trimmed
with yellow,--and being anxious to rejoin the frigate, Falconer arose
with difficulty, and after refreshing himself by a draught of pure
water from the Sauchieburn, at a place above where the dead lay in
it, he took his way towards the north, and fortunately found a stray
horse saddled and bridled grazing in a field, near the gate of which
its rider, a trooper, with the laurel of the Grahams in his morion,
lay dead.  This animal with great docility permitted Falconer to
seize the reins and leap on his back; thus mounted, he soon left the
fatal field behind, and rode through the scattered oaks of the
Torwood towards the ferry by which the Forth was crossed opposite
Alloa.

The whole country appeared deserted; he saw no one, and heard not
even a dog bark; thus the stillness became oppressive after the storm
of war, the strife of wounds and agony, the carnage and horrors of
the day that was past.  He soon reached the boor-tree thickets at the
Craig ward, and saw the beautiful river with the Clackmannan hills
and old Alloa rise before him in the moonlight, with the King's ships
at anchor in the stream, with courses loose and a spring upon their
cables.  Half a bow-shot from the beach were several well-oared
boats, full of armed men, and by their garb Falconer recognised his
own arquebussiera and the King's seamen, while the royal standard
drooped from the boats' sterns, and swept the water.

"Ho--boat yoho!" cried he, leaping from his horse.

"David Falconer, at last!" cried a number of distant voices, as the
oars dipped, and the boat shot in.

"Welcome in safety, messmate o' mine," said the bluff admiral, who
was clad in his helmet and suit of steel; "we heard you had parted
your cable in yonder devilish field."

"Only unhorsed, Sir Andrew."

"Any planks stove in, or timbers started?"

"None, thank Heaven! though I received a blow that must have killed
me, had I not----"

"Like most Scotsmen in these troublous times, been well used to cuts
and blows," interrupted Barton.  "So the battle was fairly fought?"

"Yea, fairly as the Ball of Scone, as the saw hath it--fairly fought
and most unhappily lost.  Alas! yonder field of battle is the very
garden of Death!"

"And what of the king?" asked several voices.

"The king--is he not on board the _Yellow Frigate_?"

"No," said the admiral; "I would to God he were, for then he would be
in safe anchoring ground.  Which way did he ride?"

"I know not, for I fell by his side in the middle of the battle----"

"Happy thou, my good Falconer, to share that day's vengeance with the
king," said the admiral; "but that I had other ropes to splice, I had
assuredly been with thee.  Well?"

"The lord Lindesay gave him a horse of matchless blood and speed,
whereon, if evil happened or the day were lost, he might reach you
here at the Craigward----"

"We have never sighted him once, though many a fugitive hath crossed,
for we have been little better than ferrymen since the gloaming fell.
The auld Earl of Menteith, in his battered harness; the Preceptor of
Torphichen, with three other knights of Rhodez; and many of the
Ogilvies, as we knew by their tartan plaids and the hawthorn in their
helmets; and Murrays, with the juniper twig;--most of them pricked
with spears or slashed by sword cuts, have we taken across the river;
but nought have we seen of the king, though the Preceptor averred
that he saw him ride towards the north."

"What if he should have fallen from the Lindesay's fiery steed, and
now be lying in the Torwood?"

"St. Mary avert it!" said Falconer.  "Yet, when I bethink me now, I
saw more than one dead man lying in his armour on the sward, between
this and the field."

"Sayest thou so?" exclaimed the admiral, leaping lightly ashore,
despite his years and rotundity, "and we are loitering here like so
many hag-ridden lubbers!  Barton, do thou keep the boats here for us;
and, Falconer, take twenty of thine arquebusses and come with me;
we'll bear up towards the battlefield a little way, and see if aught
may be descried of the king; come on shore with your flasks, forks,
and arquebusses, heave a-head my men, and quickly."

The soldiers hastened up the bank, and Falconer would have resigned
his horse to the admiral, but the latter declined, saying "that he
always lost some of his outer-sheathing when perched on horseback."
So Sir David drew his sword, and led the way back to the field of
battle.

They marched three or four miles without finding any trace of him
they sought.  At last the sound of hoofs was heard near the milltown
of Bannock.

"Hist--tarry a bit," said the admiral.  "Lie to, sirs."

"Halt!" cried Falconer, in a soldierly tone; "plant your forks and
wind up your spanners!  Be ready to fire at a moment's notice!"

Four heavily-armed horsemen, all riding furiously, the last however,
a long way behind his companions, dashed along the road, and though
repeatedly required to stop, they rode recklessly on, with their
armour flashing, the horsehoofs striking fire, and disappeared among
the Torwood oaks.

"Fire on the sternmost, and make him bring to," cried the admiral,
angrily; "throw a shot across his forefoot."

An arquebussier fired: the bullet whistled close to the horseman's
casque, and panting and breathless he reined up, while his horse
plunged and reared fearfully.

"Hallo! haul taut your reins or braces! don't miss stays," said the
admiral.

"From whence come you, sir?" asked Falconer, confronting him.

"From the field, as you may see," he replied, showing a drawn dagger
in his right hand.

"Know you aught of the king?"

The other gave a diabolical laugh.

"Elsewhere I have heard that laugh!" said the admiral, advancing a
step with his Jedwood axe in his hand.

"Are you not the Admiral Wood?"

"Yes; and thou----"

"Sir Hew Borthwick, at your service."

"Villain!" began Falconer; but the admiral stayed him.

"Saw ye the king to-day?"

"Yes--and moreover I saw him not a minute since."

"Where--where?"

"In yonder mill."

"And is he there now?"

"No," replied the subtle assassin; "he is one of yonder horsemen
before me, and now rides hard to reach the _Yellow Frigate_."

"Say ye so;--about ship, my lads, and after him," said the admiral,
as they hastily began to retrace their steps; while Borthwick,
driving spurs into his horse, with a shout--but whether of fear or
triumph it is impossible to say--dashed along the road after his
three comrades.

_The dagger in his hand was wet with James's blood!_

On regaining the Craigward, the admiral and his companions found that
they had been deceived, for neither the king nor any one else had
approached the ferry since they had left it.

Many days passed away, yet no tidings were heard of the unfortunate
king.




CHAPTER XXXVI.

THE MILL ON THE BANNOCK.

  "Oh, for a tongue to curse the slave
    Whose treason, like a deadly blight,
  Comes o'er the councils of the brave,
    And blasts them in their hour of might."


All unaware that he was singled out and tracked, James rode from that
lost battle-field at a rapid trot, to reach the boats of Sir Andrew
Wood; and every sound that rose from the Roman Way and woke the
echoes of the Torwood--every shout and random shot of cannon or of
hand-gun, made his heart vibrate and leap within him; for even as his
own children did this good king love the people of his kingdom.  His
heart was full of prayer and sorrow, and the resolution which he had
so often announced, of retiring to the court of his ally, Charles
VIII., was now stronger than ever within him.  As he thought of this,
his saddened spirit rose, and he felt soothed by the beauty of the
evening.  The gorgeous sunset shot upward with a thousand golden rays
behind the green peaks of the fertile Ochils, piercing the saffron
clouds like veils of shining gauze; the giant oaks of the Torwood,
many of them thirty or forty feet in circumference were rustling
their heavy foliage; the solemn Scottish firs were shaking their wiry
cones; and the perfume of the wild Gueldre roses loaded the evening
air.

The coo of the cushat dove, the plashing of the Bannock under its
pale green sauch-trees and white-blossomed hawthorns, the rocks
spotted with grey lichens and green moss, the flowers, the birds, the
foliage, the blue sky, the balmy air, and the beautiful mountains,
all spoke to the poor king of his native home and that beloved
Scotland which he had now resolved to leave for ever; and as he
approached the Bannockburn he leaped the grey charger--Lindesay's
last and fatal gift--across from bank to bank, and it cleared them by
one furious bound.  This was near Beaton's Mill, which still remains
about one mile east from the field.

The mill was a strongly-built and old-fashioned house with
crow-stepped gables, a heavily thatched roof, deep windows obscured
by flour; a square ingle-lum, over which the green ivy clustered,
stood at one end, while its huge wooden wheel revolved merrily at the
other.  Its snug and quiet aspect made the king think, with a sigh,
(as he shortened his reins and rode on,) how much the contented and
unambitious life of the occupant was to be envied.

Now it happened most unfortunately that Mysie Beaton, the gudewife of
the Milltoun, was filling a pitcher with water from the dam; and on
seeing an armed knight riding at full speed towards her, she uttered
a shriek of terror and tossed away the tin vessel, which clattered
noisily along the road, while she fled into her cottage adjoining the
mill.

Terrified by the rolling pitcher and the foolish woman's sudden cry,
the fiery grey horse swerved furiously round and threw his royal
rider heavily on the road, close to one of those boor-tree hedges
which generally in those days enclosed old gardens and barnyards in
Scotland.

Gawain Beaton, the miller, a stout ruddy man about forty years of
age, clad in a buckram gaberdine, which, like his beard and bonnet,
was whitened by flour and meal, sprang to the door on hearing his
wife cry and the armour clatter.

"Deevil mend thee, Mysie!" said he, angrily; "for thine eldritch
scraigh hath scared the horse and slain this comely gentleman!"

"Oh!  I trow not," said the woman, in great terror.

"Weel may ye trow sae," said the miller, in some consternation on
beholding the excessive richness of the king's armour; "for if his
vassals come this gate they will level the mill to its grundstane; we
sall tyne our a', and hae to flee like maukins when the bratches are
on the bent."

"Rise, sir--oh! rise; for the love of St. Mary and St. Ringan say
where are ye hurt?" cried the miller's wife, kneeling down by the
prostrate man; but there came no reply from him, though she placed
her ear close to the barred umbriere of the closed helmet.

"Hoolie," said the honest miller to his buxom wife, from whose
usually pink cheeks the roses had now fled and left them white as her
coif of Mary of Gueldre's time; "Hoolie, gudewife, see ye nocht the
knicht is feckless and weak?  Let us bear him in ayont the hallan,
and get ye the flask of usquebaugh and mak' him a milk posset."

While the fatal steed was galloping over the Carse, the miller and
his wife raised the body of the inanimate man; and bearing him in,
closed the mill-door, carefully secured its tirling-pin, and laid him
on their humble box-bed; and then while the kind and sympathizing
Mysie busied herself in making up a posset, the miller, her husband,
undid the clasps of the gorget and the back and breast-plates,
removing them all after taking off the helmet, which he did with
ease, as it was opened simply by throwing up the metonniere which
guarded the chin and throat, and which turned on the same screw with
the vizor.

On doing this the miller saw a pale and handsome face, surrounded by
thick, dark clustering hair, and a well-trimmed beard; but the
stranger was still senseless, and a streak of blood was flowing from
his mouth.  On beholding so much manly beauty, the sympathy and
remorse of the miller's wife were greatly increased; and on her knees
she took the gauntlets off his hands and assisted Gawain to chafe
them, and to lave the patient's brow with cool water which he brought
from the Bannock in a black leather jack, about sixteen inches high;
and then slowly the object of their care began to revive.

"Eh! sirs--oh! sirs--St. Mary sain us!--to see that comely face sae
pale and sad!" exclaimed Mysie; "oh! withered be my tongue for
uttering that doolfu' cry!"

"And dule it may bring to us, Mysie my doo," said the miller; "if
some o' his lances pass this way--for his friends may slaughter us,
or their enemies may slaughter him--for we kenna whether he fought
this sorrowfu' day for the king--whom God bless--or the black-hearted
nobles; but his degree is doubtless high; look at that armour, Mysie;
ilka stud on't is pure gold, and the diamonds shine like stars on his
baldrick and dudgeon knife!"

"Alake, alake!" mourned Mysie, who deemed herself the source of all,
and whose sympathies were more and more excited by the apparent rank
of the unknown; "the sicht o' this winsome gentleman wi' his silken
hair bedabbled in bluid wad melt the heart o' a nether mill-stone."

"'Od, Mysie, I ken mine is loupin like a mill happer, and I wuss we
were weel clear o' this ravelled hesp."

"And some fair lady in Lawder or Angus will be sitting on the
tower-head wi' a fan in her hand, looking sadly owre moss and
muirland for you, my puir sir," said Mysie, passing her hand timidly
and kindly through James's silky hair.  And now his senses began to
rally.  "I am richt glad, Gawain dear, I hid _your_ steel bonnet and
harness this morning----"

"And keepit me frae fechting for our noble king--mair shame to you,
Mysie lass."

"Thanks, good people, thanks," murmured their patient, rising up
slowly on his elbow, and gazing about him with sad and heavy eyes.
He passed a hand across his damp and blood-stained brow, and looked
again at the low-roofed and clay-floored cottage, with its bunkers or
window-seats, its fir ambres and girnels, its Scottish fauldstools
and wide fire-place, before which lay the half of a cart-wheel as a
fender, and within which, though the month was June, there blazed a
fire of turf and bog-fir under a huge three-legged kail-pot that hung
on one of those wooden crocans, or crooks (last used in the
Hebrides), and then he turned again with surprise to his attendants.
"Honest people, accept my thanks, I pray you, for this great
kindness--but say, where am I?"

"In the mill-toun o' Bannock, gentle sir," said Mysie, making low
courtesy.

"How far from this day's field of sorrow?"

"Little mair than a mile, sir."

"He is a king's man," said the miller, with satisfaction.

"And who, gudeman, are you?" he asked, with mild dignity.

"Gawain Beaton, a puir miller, at your honour's service," said the
host, removing his dusty bonnet; "and this is Mysie, my gudewife,
sir."

"Here, then, I am safe.  Thank God, I have not fallen among those who
boast of gentle blood and heraldic blazonry," replied the other,
while his eyes flashed.

"Gentle bluid--I dinna understand ye, sir.  I am a far awa' cousin o'
the Beatons o' Balfour," said Gawain, proudly.

"What, art thou, too, infected by this absurdity?  But, Gawain
Beaton, and thou, too, gudewife, if I live, shall find this service
faithfully and thankfully remembered; but I fear me my days cannot be
many now, for that fall from my horse has been a dreadful shock to
me."

"Oh say, gentle sir, what can we do for you," said Mysie.  "Command
us--we are at your bidding."

"Then get me a priest, that I may confess."

"There is none nearer than Cambuskenneth or St. Ninian's Kirk," said
Gawain, taking his walking-staff and dagger; "yet I can soon reach
either; but may we ask your name, sir?"

"My gudeman, this day, at morn, I was YOUR KING," said James, with a
hollow voice and sorrowful emphasis, as he sank back on the coarse
box-bed.

Gawain stood as one terrified and confounded on hearing this; but
Mysie, his wife, burst into tears, and wringing her hands in great
fear and excitement, ran out upon the roadway as she heard hoofs
approaching.

"A priest," she cried, "a priest, for God's love and sweet St. Mary's
sake: a priest to confess the king!"

"To confess whom say ye?" cried the headmost of four armed horsemen,
who, with helmets open and swords drawn, galloped up to her in the
glooming.

"The king, the king, gude sirs--our puir and sakeless king!"

"And where is he, gudewife?"

"Lying in our pair bed--here, in here, ayont the hallan in my
gudeman's mill.  Oh, sirs, for a priest!"

"Hush, woman, I am a priest," said the first, who was no other than
_Sir_ Hew Borthwick, with a glance of infernal import to his three
companions, as he leaped from his horse; "lead me to the king."

Borthwick entered the lonely mill, and his three companions, who were
no other than Sir Patrick Gray of Kyneff, Sir William Stirling of
Keir, and Sir James Shaw of Sauchie, after fastening their horses to
the hedge without, followed him beyond the _hallan_, or wooden
partition which formed the inner apartment.




CHAPTER XXXVII.

THE REGICIDES.

  "Upon desolate Aros there is wailing and weeping,
  For the chief of her lords in the dark chamber sleeping;
  In the dark chamber sleepeth our curly-tressed warrior,
  In the day of the battle our bulwark and barrier."
                                        _Lament for Maclean of Aros._


The poor miller was inexpressibly alarmed on perceiving the four
armed knights enter; the richness of their armour and accoutrements
impressed him still more, and he hastened to say, in an explanatory
manner--

"His horse threw him at our door--a wicked horse, sirs;--we have done
a' we could--on my life, sirs, I assure you--my gude wife and I--that
the horse----"

"Enough, enough, fellow," said Sir Patrick Gray, gruffly.  "Stir up
that fire, for this den of thine is as dark as a dungeon.  Let us see
where _this_ king of ours is lying."

Though shocked and startled by the bearing of his visitors, Gawain
hastened to throw a quantity of fir-apples on the fire, where they
blazed and crackled and diffused a brilliant light throughout the
humble apartment, and the highly polished-suit of the ruffians shone
like silver as they stooped over the bed of the hapless and helpless
king, who was "covered by a coarse checked rug," and on whom they
gazed with eyes as pitiless in expression as their hearts were in
feeling.

"Does your majesty fear death?" asked Gray.

"Nay, it never was my fear, and _now_ it is my only hope," replied
James, in a low voice, "but I asked for a priest, sirs----"

"Well--here I am--a priest, though cased in iron," said Borthwick.

"And for whom fought you to-day, false priest?"

"By the cross of Macgriddy!  I fought for my own hand--as Hal o' the
Wynd fought, in old King Robert's time; but I am, nevertheless, a
priest--behold my tonsure--or what remains of it."

"It is enough--even the unworthy is better than none.  And you will
hear my confession?"

"Yea," answered the bantering ruffian, "wert thou as great a clown as
ever played at Hogshouther."

"And who are ye, sirs?" asked the king, turning uneasily from this
disrespectful person.

"I am William Stirling of the Keir," hissed one through his teeth.

"And thou art the Lord Gray?" said James to a second, his brow
darkening, as he saw the scarlet tabard-coat, which had a lion within
its engrailed border, and was worn above the armour of the wearer.

"Nay, I am only the Lord Gray's near kinsman, and captain of your
majesty's castle at Broughty."

"Leave me," said James, bitterly; "I will confess myself--and oh,
bless me, father, for I have sorely sinned."

A terrible smile spread over Borthwick's face, as he grasped his
dagger, and saw the poor king, after three futile attempts to rise,
sink powerlessly down on the miller's humble pallet.  Gawain and his
wife drew aside, awestruck and silent; Mysie held her apron to her
mouth with one hand, while the other clasped her husband's arm; but
the Lairds of Keir, Kyneff, and Sauchie stood a little in the
background, and conferred together in whispers on what should now be
done, for their minds were agitated by a slender doubt, though the
viler slave of English Henry's gold felt none.

"Dost thou expect to recover?" he sneered.

"I trow I might," sighed the poor king, "if I had a physician."

"How long dost thou expect to live?" he asked again, playing with his
victim as a cat does with a mouse.

"Alas! priest; He who numbereth the leaves in the Torwood, and every
blade of grass in the Carse of Stirling, alone can tell."

"I never numbered either; yet I think thou'lt be a dead man in ten
minutes."

A flush passed over James's pallid brow.

"Be it so, father; the world and all its vanities are nothing now to
me;--wifeless, childless,--or worse, for my own son is in arms
against me; my soul hovers, as it were, between this world and the
next.  Oh would, father, that I might cure my soul at the expense of
my body!"

"Pythagoras----"

"He was a pagan."

"Well, what matters it," said Borthwick, becoming deadly pale, while
his eyes gleamed with fire, and he felt himself endued with a demon's
strength of mind and body, by the very magnitude of the crime he was
about to commit; "what matters it," he continued, drawing one of
those long Scottish dirks, such as are still worn with the Highland
garb; "Pythagoras said that the eyes could not be cured without the
head, nor the head without the body, nor the body without the soul!
I am not now a priest, and cannot shrive thee; so by this stroke--and
this--_and this_--I destroy both body and soul together!"

And with these terrible words the merciless ruffian buried his dagger
"many times," says Lindesay of Pitscottie, in the breast of the
unfortunate king, who expired without a sigh.

Thus perished James III., in his thirty-fifth year.

Terrified on beholding the committal of a deed so awful, the poor
miller and his wife abandoned their mill and cottage, and fled into
the recesses of the Torwood, where they lurked many days.

When they ventured to return with some of their neighbours, the body
of the king was gone, and no trace of it remained, save the blood
encrusted on the bedding where it had lain.

* * * * * * *

"Thou hast done it at last, ruffian!" said the grim Sir Patrick Gray;
"such a deed hath not been seen in Scotland since that night in the
Black Friary at Perth, when James I. was stabbed in Jane of
Beaufort's arms.  And now, sirs, what shall we do with this royal
piece of carrion?"

"Let us fire the house, and leave _it_ here to be consumed," said
Shaw.

"Not a bad idea; but then consider the alarm it would raise."

"Let us fling it into the dam, then."

"Nay--toss him into the adjacent fields; there it will be found and
buried as the corpse of some one slain in the battle of to-day," said
the barbarous Laird of Keir.

"Then so be it; help me, sirs," said Borthwick, panting fiercely as
he spoke; "for, o' my soul, dead flesh is heavy to bear.  I am sorry
we allowed yonder hagridden fools, the miller and his wife, to escape
us, though."

The assassin and his companions dragged the gashed and bloody corpse
irreverently cut upon the clay floor, and carried it in the moonlight
across a neighbouring field, and there flung it info a ditch beside a
thorn-hedge.

Ere he left it, Borthwick tore off the third finger of the right hand
a large signet-ring, on the native amethyst of which was engraved a
vine tree, fading and withered, because the current that flowed
around was supposed to be wine instead of water.  This strange
device, which was adopted by the king (says Abercrombie) "when he saw
his son in arms against him," bore the legend,--

  "_Mea sic mihi prosunt,_"

and the wretch placed it on his own finger.  They again thought of
firing the cottage; but the sudden appearance of Sir Andrew Wood's
party made them think of providing for their own safety.

Their interview is already related.

Keir, Kyneff, and Sauchie took the road for Linlithgow, but Borthwick
rode on direct to Berwick--as the king's private signet, when
transmitted to Henry VII., would be the best assurance that the King
of Scotland was slain.

Had the admiral arrived fifteen minutes sooner, he might have saved
James's life, and spared Scotland the disgrace of one more historical
atrocity.

The house in which this cruel regicide occurred is still in
existence, and is yet named _Beaton's Milne_, and the traditionary
account of the murder preserved by the inhabitants of the _town_ or
hamlet, closely resembles that given in history, and reverently the
good people still lower their voices, when pointing to the corner
where their king was murdered.  In 1667, as a date shows, the house
of Gawain Beaton had been somewhat modernized; but it yet bears the
aspect of antiquity and strength.

It stands about one hundred and fifty feet eastward of the road from
Stirling to Glasgow; and though thatched, is yet as snug a little
dwelling as when Gawain attended the _happer_ and Mysie's
spinning-wheel birred by its ingle in the days of the unhappy king,
James III.




CHAPTER XXXVIII.

THE HOUSE OF THE BARTONS.

  "Do men love thee?  Art thou so bound
  To men, that how thy name will sound,
  Will vex thee lying underground."--TENNYSON.


The insurgent lords had marched from Linlithgow to Leith, but had not
as yet obtained possession of the capital or its fortress which the
provost and governor maintained against them.  They had established
themselves in the seaport, and the house of the late Sir Andrew
Barton was assigned to the young Duke of Rothesay and his suite.

It was the 18th of June.  The sun was as bright, the sky as blue, and
the atmosphere as pure, as they ever are in that delightful month.
The broad Forth, with its anchorage full of crayers, pincks, and
caravels; its green isles and winding bays--the surf-beaten rocks and
fertile promontories of Fife, with the fertile shores of Lothian were
glowing in sunny light.

The seaport was still, perhaps, in its infancy, though Sir Andrew
Wood, Sir Andrew Barton, Sir Alexander Mathieson, and Sir William
Merrimonth, all brave knights, who received their spurs on their own
decks, and who had fought their way at sea as merchant-skippers, had
given to the burgh a wealth and importance such as no port in the
kingdom had hitherto known; and though its wynds, alleys, and closes
were quaint, small, and irregular, with all their gable-ends towards
the street, though the shore was encumbered by boats, anchors,
kailyards, and gardens, where _now_ broad moles of stone bulwark in
the river; and though its pier was of wood, without either lighthouse
or martello tower, the stately argosies and gay caravels of these
fighting merchant-traders, and of many others, gave a gay aspect to
the harbour; though, as usual still, at this season, it was the least
busy time, for the Baltic ships had not returned.

At anchor in the stream, or moored beside that wooden pier, which was
burned by the English, 1544, lay those quaint old merchantmen, with
their basketed tops, their lofty poops, and pinck-built, or square
projecting sterns, which were retained until lately by some of the
Leith whalers, and may yet be found among our Orkney shipping.

Leith was full of armed men; the nobles and their forces thronged
every street and alley; their banners waved over the houses they
occupied, and armour, spears, swords, and axes flashed incessantly in
the sunshine, especially in the Wynd of St. Nicholas and the vicinity
of the house of the Bartons.  This was a lofty, strong, and turreted
mansion, situated near the site of the present Custom-house, on the
west bank of the Leith; and in after years, Henry VIII. gave the
admiral of England special orders to cannonade and destroy it, during
Hertford's invasion.

In the hall or chamber of dais of this noble dwelling of the old
merchant, whose son and heir was then on board the _Yellow Frigate_,
the Duke of Rothesay was seated in council with the victorious
insurgent lords; and the splendour and luxury with which the
enterprising trader (a man far in advance of them in "the march of
intellect" and civilization, and far in advance of the age,) was
enabled to decorate the dwelling his industry had won, must have
formed a strong contrast to their rude stone-halls and the wooden
benches of their secluded towers on the braes of Angus, or in the
dells of Galloway; and so, no doubt, each earl, lord, and laird
thought, as they twisted their wiry mustachios under their steel
caps, and surveyed the apartment in which they held council--the
dining hall of a Leith merchant, in the year of the first revolution.

It had six tall windows, each barred with iron and latticed with
brass; the roof was arched with stone; but the walls were hung with
pale brown leather, richly stamped with thistles and silver
fleurs-de-lys.  The oak furniture was enormously massive and strong;
all the chairs were quaintly and grimly carved, and had arms with
great knobs and square cushioned seats of blue Utrecht velvet.  The
fire-irons were chained to the jambs of the fire-place; for our
forefathers, honest souls! being somewhat short-tempered, were wont
to have disputes when they sat round the fire at night.  In the
recesses of the carved stone ambres and quaint old knobby cabinets,
were many articles of vertu and rarity, which the taste of umquhile
Sir Andrew Barton, when homeward bound, had made him select for his
good dame in happier days.  There were Turkish carpets, African
skins, and Persian bows; Venetian crystals, Japanese canisters
(brought by the way of the Red Sea), Muscovite bowls, and Italian
bronzes; a plump Cupid sprawling on a dolphin's back; a St. John
asleep; the model of a ship, and several Egyptian gods and goddesses,
minus "pantaloons and bodices," on which the noble lords looked
somewhat dubiously, "as smelling of sorcery and damnable idolatry;"
but the late Sir Andrew was a pious and upright man--one who would
rather have died than withheld a plack of the cess due to kirk or
king; and in his mercantile days he never omitted to pay regularly to
the Hospitallers of St. Anthony at Leith the kain to which they were
entitled by law--a Scottish quart from every tun of wine that passed
the Beacon Rock; and of all the fighting merchant-mariners of the
time, none had paid more liberally the _primo gilt_, as it is still
named,--a duty paid from time immemorial, to aid "the poor, old, and
infirm mariners of Leith."

The southern windows of the hall, showed the ancient bridge of the
burgh, the old gothic Hospital and Church of St. Nicholas, with its
burying-ground, (on which, in after years, the citadel was built,)
and the Links of North Leith, a green and level plain, which has now
entirely disappeared, and become an irreclaimable waste, flooded at
every tide.  The eastern windows showed the opposite bank of the
river, with the quaint shipping, the Beacon Rock, the wooden pier,
the steeple of St. Anthony, and the picturesque outline of the old
Timber Holfe, or bourse, where the Memel and Riga wood was sold, and
where traders generally met for the transaction of business.

Sad, pale, and thoughtful, with a heart crushed between sorrow for
the disappearance of his beloved Margaret, and the new mystery which
involved the fate of his unhappy father, who had not been seen since
the day of the battle, young Rothesay sat at the table, in a raised
seat of honour: and his dark, melancholy eyes wandered alternately
over the sunny landscape without, and the crowd of steel-clad, stern,
and proud landholders who sat around the board or thronged the
apartment, conversing and laughing, all very much at their ease,--for
they were not the men to be awed by the presence or opinions of a
spirit-broken boy, even though that boy was the heir of the throne.

On one side of him stood the Earl of Errol, the Lord High Constable
of Scotland, with his white ivory baton of office; on the other sat
the gigantic Earl of Angus, Lieutenant-general of the realm, clad in
his dark armour, with the _Red Heart_ crowned and emblazoned on his
surcoat, and his gauntletted hands crossed upon that terrible weapon,
which had slain Glencairn and many a gallant man.  Of all the poor
men of letters who thronged the court of James III., not one was
present here; but in the sunny recesses of the windows were Catharine
Stirling of the Keir, Countess of Angus, Beatrix Douglas, Dowager of
Errol, wearing on her spousal finger a bone ring, to which the
wedding-ring of her late lord was attached by a cord; Elizabeth
Douglas, Lady Lyle, and other dames of the rebel faction, among whom
were the sad and shrinking daughters of Lord Drummond--Sybilla and
Euphemia--who fixed their eyes, furtively, however, on the _Yellow
Frigate_ and her armed consorts, now many in number, which were all
riding at anchor, under the admiral's flag, in the roads, about two
miles distant, after scouring the surrounding shores, and sinking
every ship whose crew adhered to the insurgent lords.  The latter had
offered the most splendid bribes to the Leith masters, if they would
arm ships and attack the Laird of Largo; but not one would sail
against him, were a ducal coronet the reward of conquest.

Seven days had now elapsed since the battle of Sauchie had been
fought; yet, in all that time, no tidings had been heard of James;
for the poor miller, Beaton, had not yet dared to relate the terrible
scene he had witnessed; and those who could have given the best
information, viz., Gray and Stirling, stood by the prince's council
board, exchanging those deep smiles that villains can only read.

"Every where we have offered bribes to those who may bring us sure
tidings of your royal father," said Angus, "by twang of trumpet at
every burghcross; I have proffered brave propines for drinking, and
many a rich largess, yet no news hath come in."

"Rumours are current that the king has been assassinated," said the
Lord Hailes, bluntly.

The young prince grew ghastly pale, and started with horror at the
remark.

"By God's love and the Virgin's purity, I pray you, do not say so!"
he exclaimed, imploringly.

"By both, I assure you, it is said so," returned the coarse,
unfeeling noble.

"Rumour ever lies," said Sir Patrick Gray, angrily; "for on one hand
'tis said he has fled to England--on the other, to Holland; and there
are many who maintain that he is on board the ships of that
contumacious loon, old Largo, whose boats plied at the Craigward the
live-long battle day, ferrying over the wounded and the fugitive."

"From my soul, I thank you for the hope, my good Sir Patrick," said
the prince, mournfully.

"Until the king's flight or safety--his death or abdication are
known, my lords, we can decide on nothing," said the constable.

"Save that we must keep together in arms," added Angus, "till
Parliament meets, and we are voted scathless for the raid at Sauchie."

"We have gained a battle," said old Lord Drummond, in a growling
whisper to his daughters: "we have routed our false king--slain his
minion Ramsay of Balmain, whom some styled Lord of Bothwell; we have
cut to pieces his red-doubletted guard; yet I am not one inch nearer
discovering where the foul villains of the late court have hidden or
murdered your sister Maggie, to further their English alliance."

Crushed by their own sorrows, the poor girls did not reply to this
vituperation, save by the tears which fell silently over their
cheeks.  Young girls in general look to the bright side of
everything: thus the sisters were full of hope; and they loved their
lost Margaret so much, that they shrunk, instinctively, with dismay
from the rough inferences of their father; and from the idea that any
one could injure a being so gentle and so harmless.

"Listen to me, Effie Drummond," resumed the old lord, through his
long mustachios, which resembled those of a walrus: "look a little
more at the quarterings on Lord Hailes' tabard-coad and a little less
at yonder devilish ships; and thou, too, Madam Sybilla--what, the
fury! hath this skipper's son gained more influence over thee in one
year than I have done in eighteen?"

Still they wept silently, for none had spoken to them kindly save
young Rothesay, and he knew not their secret; but now the sudden
entrance of Lord Home, with his mail covered by dust, relieved them
of their father's persecution, fur all now turned to him.

"Welcome, Bailie of Coldinghame!" said Angus, who by his loftiness
and confidence seemed more like a king than a mere peer; "what
tidings--hast heard of our missing man?"

"Nought, save that he hath fled; but I have been harrying the lands
of the _malcontents_, his people."

"And how many castles hast thou burned?"

"At the head of a thousand Border spears, I have ridden through all
the Howe of Angus, where men shall long remember the slogan of _a
Home_!" replied the chief, who was a very good type of those feudal
nobles, who never bowed to religion or to law, and who never knew
remorse for crime, or fear of God or man, and were generally as
destitute of pure patriotism as ever Scottish peers have been in
later years.  "I have sacked twenty farm towns on the baronies of the
so-called Duke of Montrose; I have ruined and dismantled ten castles
in the Carse of Gowrie, and laid all the towns of Fife under heavy
contribution."

"Ye have done well, by St. Bryde!" said Angus, giving a glance of
stern curiosity at Rothesay, who had listened with stolid apathy.

And now entered, quite as hastily, Robert, Lord Lyle; he was one of
James's most faithful servants, and had recently returned from an
embassy to England, concerning the slaying of Barton.

"How now, Lyle--what news?" asked Angus.

"Men say the king is dead--murdered, and that the Lord Forbess hath
risen in the north, and ridden from Aberdeen to Elgin o' Murray,
displaying a bloody shirt upon a spear, and summoning all the
Gordons, the Forbesses, and Leslies to rise in arms against you, and
for vengeance!  My lords, alake! this soundeth like evil."

"Let him do so; we may meet him and the northern clans by
Sauchieburn, perhaps," said Angus; "but I would we knew the verity,
whether or not the king is on board the ships of yonder stubborn
admiral."

"Another messenger with tidings," said Lord Hailes; "my kinsman, Adam
Hepburn, of the Black Castle, has come in from the east country, and
would speak with his grace."

"Admit him," said Rothesay; "he may have news of the king my father."

Hepburn, a hardy and sunburned south-country laird, accoutred in a
very plain and somewhat rusty headpiece, corslet, vambraces, and
steel gloves, with an enormous sword, dagger, and wheel-lock caliver
at his girdle, now pushed his way unceremoniously forward, but bowed
low on perceiving the young prince, whom he knew at once by the
richness of his dress--being without armour, and having on a short
crimson velvet tunic, girdled tightly about the waist, long hose of
spotless white silk, a violet-coloured cloak lined with white satin,
and on his breast the sparkling collar of the Thistle.

"What news, laird?  If of my father, by my soul, you shall have the
best of all the forfeited baronies."

"Would I had such tidings to give," replied the soldier-like laird,
who having _no title_ was the truer Scotsman; "but I have merely come
in on the spur, with a message from the captain of the king's Castle
of Dunbar."

"Anent what?"

"Five English ships, which, after having lain wind-bound for many
days in Phillorth Bay, have appeared off the Firth of Forth, and
avoiding our cannon at Dunbar, now hover thereabout, plundering the
coast, cutting away our fishers' nets, firing on their boats, and
taking every advantage, after their old fashion, of these our present
hapless broils."

"What can we do, my lords?" said the prince, whose patriotism was
fired by hearing this news, which made Gray and Shaw exchange glances
of anger and disappointment.

"Nothing that I know of, for Wood and all his people remain sullenly
and proudly aloof from us, acknowledging no authority but that of
James III.," said Angus.

"My father's good and faithful subject!" said Rothesay, with honest
ardour.

"I will wager my coronet against a jester's cap, that old Largo will
sail against these Englishmen, if we do but ask him," said Angus.

"I say nay," said Sir Patrick Gray.

"I gay _yea_," added Angus, frowning.

"If this English churl is yet tarrying in Scottish waters, we may be
totally ruined," whispered Shaw to Gray.

"It cannot be he; this breathless courier speaks _five_ ships; now
young Howard had but three."

"True; yet I quake at the suggestion of sending out Wood against him."

In less than half an hour several urgent messages of similar import
came from the Whitefriars of Aberlady; from the provost of North
Berwick, and the prioress of the Cistercians there, all complaining
of ravages committed along the coast of Eastern Lothian; and by the
prince's desire the Albany herald was despatched to Admiral Wood,
requesting him to come on shore, on the double purpose of discovering
whether he knew anything of the king's safety, and if he would sail
against the enemy.

Too wary to trust himself among these barbarous nobles, Sir Andrew
"refused (says Abercrombie) to comply with the request unless good
hostages were delivered to him for his security," thus, two of the
peers volunteered for this service, George Lord Seaton and John Lord
Fleming, both men of great integrity.  They were sent to the fleet as
hostages, and were received with all honour on board the _Yellow
Frigate_, where they were put in ward in one of the great cabins,
under the care of Willie Wad, the gunner, who voluntarily bound
himself to drink an unlimited quantity of bilge should they escape.

In one hour after this, the great barge of the admiral, having his
banner, _azure_, charged with a tree, _or_, and pulled by sixteen
well-armed oarsmen, with Cuddie in the prow, and Robert Barton and
Sir David Falconer, both sheathed in armour and accoutred to the
teeth, swept past the Mussel-cape, and through the old harbour, with
oar-blades flashing in the sunshine.  They landed at the ancient
bridge which crossed the Leith, near where a chapel of St. Ninian was
erected soon after by an abbot of Holyrood, with consent of his
chapter.  It was removed about seventy years ago, and nothing remains
of it now but an arched door.  At the other end of the bridge was a
miraculous well, which belonged to the Bailie of St. Anthony.

Accompanied by all his barge's crew, armed with their
boat-stretchers, and having daggers and wheel-locks at their belts,
the old admiral, with no other ornament above his armour than the
_silver whistle_, which was the badge of his rank, strode through the
Wynd of St. Nicholas, and entered the house of Barton, where ensued
one of the most interesting interviews recorded in the history of
those stirring times.




CHAPTER XXXIX.

THE PRINCE AND THE ADMIRAL.

  "Rebellion! foul dishonouring word,
    Whose wrongful blight so oft hath stained
  The holiest cause that tongue or sword
    Or mortal ever lost or gained."--MOORE.


Undaunted by the presence of so many enemies, Sir Andrew Wood and his
two faithful followers ascended the great turnpike stair of Barton's
house, and were ushered by pages, esquires, and heralds into the
presence of the young prince and the chief conspirators, several of
whom were grouped in the recesses of the hall windows, conversing
earnestly.  Others sat in corners, drinking the right Rhenish, the
Canary, and Bourdeaux with which the cellars of the wealthy Laird of
Barton had been stored.

"Robbie Barton," said the admiral, as they pushed their way towards
the dais; "by St. Anthony, 'tis enough to make thy father's bones
start from their coral bed in the English sea when so many deil's
buckies and gilded sharks hold wassail under his old rooftree!  God
sain thee, old shipmate o' mine," sighed Sir Andrew, as he cast his
eyes over the hall; "many a long wine horn hast thou and I birled
here, over our old yarns of lee shores and cannon-shot."

Barton felt his heart stirred doubly by grief and indignation; for
every feature of this hall reminded him of his brave old father, and
he was exasperated to find so many of his enemies installed there,
all very much at their ease, and drinking from his cellars as if the
contents thereof were their own.

"My lords and gentlemen," said he, sternly; "by my faith, ye reck
little of hership and hamesücken."

"These are but the spray of the great wave, Barton," said Sir David
Falconer, "and are small items in the great amount of treason and
rebellion."

"And see," added the admiral, "on yonder window-bunker the traitor
Sauchie, full to the beams with thy father's wine.  Ah, false
villain, one day I hope to see thee spritsail-yarded by three feet of
a good rapier!"

By this time they had reached the presence of the prince, and his
vicinity was fortunate for them, as the freedom of their remarks was
such that several poniards were drawn, and there was every prospect
of their being assailed, though the two noble hostages were certain
to dangle from the _Frigate's_ yardarm in an hour after.  The young
prince stood up, and coloured deeply as they appeared before him, and
various whispers went round that otherwise silent circle of proud,
ferocious, and unscrupulous peers; for, owing to the loftiness,
dignity, and high bearing of Wood, there ran from tongue to tongue a
suggestion that "he was _the king_--James himself;" and then a thrill
pervaded all present, for he was the only one of three who wore a
close casque, the rivets of the vizor having been secured before he
came ashore, and his armour having gilded passguards on the
shoulders, and puckered _lambeaux_ similar to a suit frequently worn
by the king on state occasions.  The same resemblance occurred to
Rothesay, who, looking up with eyes full of hope and timidity, said
in a low and agitated voice,--

"Sir, are you the king my father?"

The artlessness of this question, and the touching accent of the
young prince, smote the veteran admiral to the heart.  He burst into
tears, and replied, says Pitscottie,--

"I am not your father, sir; but I am his true servant, and the sworn
enemy of those who have occasioned his downfall."

Though Lord Lyle and some of the nobles were touched by the pure,
honest, and generous loyalty of Wood, his words kindled the rage and
scorn of Angus and others.  In the grief of age and manhood there is
something very impressive; and thus, when that brave mariner wept
there was a dead silence in the vast apartment; Rothesay covered his
face with his violet-coloured mantle, while Barton and Falconer cast
down their eyes, for they were deeply moved.  But now that stately
bearing, which made so many suppose the closed helmet concealed the
face of James, kindled the pride of the nobles, who muttered among
themselves, and to those who adhered to them.

"I would give three of my best crofts to see old Tarrybreeks, and
these saucy tarpaulins, his comrades, with their master in yonder
ditch beside the Bannock," said Sir James Shaw, who was somewhat
tipsy, to Gray, who grasped his arm, and gave him a fierce and
significant glance; for, in that iron age, banter (as we now
understand it) was unknown in Scotland.  Every man wore a sword and
dagger; so jesting was perilous work at all times.

"You speak somewhat loftily, _Master_ Wood," said Angus, with a
haughty frown on his dark and commanding face.

"I am Andrew Wood, _knight_, my Lord Earl of Angus," he replied,
firmly; "I received that title from a king's hand on my own deck,
abaft the mizen-mast--a deck drenched with foreign blood!  From my
father, who was an honest and hard-working merchant-mariner of this
good port of Leith, I inherited nothing but a bold heart, and my
sturdy legs and arms.  I have had to work my way through the voyage
of life, with no compass but honesty, and no convoy but faith in God;
and since I was an idle brat, who spent the day in fishing for
podleys out of the fore-chains, I have never owed or wronged any man
the value of a ropeyarn or a herring-scale--least of all do I owe any
merit to a dead ancestry--thof most here, my lord, owe mickle mair to
their ancestors than they owe to themselves, God wot!  But enough of
this; the gunner to his lintstock, the----"

"Remember, Laird of Largo," said Lord Drummond, with a darkening
brow, "thou speakest to the Lieutenant-general of the kingdom, and to
men who will not stoop to monarchs, for 'tis beneath the dignity of
true nobility."

"Then why should I stoop to such as thee, an old jackfeather, when
'tis beneath the dignity of true manhood?"

"Let us have no brawling here, sirs," said the High Constable,
stepping forward, as he saw the admiral disposed to "come to close
quarters;" "remember my office, its high prerogative, and this
presence."

"Know ye aught, Sir Andrew, of the king my father?" asked Rothesay.

"Alake!  I do not," replied Wood, mournfully.

"Will you swear on your honour as a knight, that he is not on board
your fleet?"

"There are over many knights here for me to be believed," replied
Wood; "but I pledge you my faith and troth as a seaman, that he is
not on board of any of the ships now under my broad pennon."

"Who were those you took off after the battle?"

"My Lord St. John of Jerusalem, the High Treasurer, the Mareschal de
Concressault, and a few more loyal men: but as for the king,--God
bless him, and confound his enemies!--of him I know nothing; even
rumour hath not reached us in the Firth.  My shipmates and I were
ready to have risked our lives in his defence; and we landed many
times on that evil day, yet saw him not, though duly warned by his
Grace of Montrose that James would wear a yellow plume, and ride a
grey charger."

Here Sir James Shaw gave a peculiar snort, and blew his nose to
conceal his malicious laughter.

Then (as Buchanan records) Sir Andrew added,--

"If the good king is alive, I am resolved to obey _none_ but him; if
he is slain, I am ready to _revenge_ him!"

At this Grey almost clutched his dagger, and felt assured he would
never be safe while such a man as Wood lived.

"Would to St. Mary he had never left our ship!" said Barton, who had
hitherto remained silent, "for then he would have been in safety from
those false traitors, whom I hope to see one day rewarded as they
deserve, by having their dog-throats cut from clew to ear-ring."

Perceiving that these rough speeches were rousing the anger and
apprehension of the insurgent lords, and moreover that they were
making too favourable an impression on Rothesay, who never forgot the
three leal and true men who now so boldly confronted so many
enemies--for Scotland's truest sons were seldom men of noble
birth--Lord Angus said,--

"Sir Andrew Wood, news hath come in, within this hour, that five
English ships are plundering all the coast about Dunbar, so that men
can neither fish at sea, nor plough upon the shore, for the shot of
their cannon and arquebusses.  They have burned many homesteads in
the night, and harried the hirsels of the friars at Aberlady; so, if
you will not serve _us_, you may, at least, serve Scotland, by
ridding her of these gnats, who sting her in her time of toil and
trouble."

"That will I do blithely, lord earl!  I searched all the coast from
the Red Head to Dunbar Sands, and yet saw nought of these English
craft, which were off Taymouth last month.  What say ye, Barton, if
it should prove to be Eddy Howard?"

"That I will found an altar to St. Clement in Mary's Kirk of Leith,
where, if we are victorious, masses shall be said till the day of
doom."

"Where were these craft last seen, lord earl?"

"Cruising between the Isle of May and the Craig of Bass," answered
Hepburn of Blackcastle; "there are five in all, and three have their
forecastle guns _en barbette_."

"With red crosses in their topsails?" asked Falconer.

"The same."

"'Tis Howard!" exclaimed Sir Andrew Wood, striking his hands together
with joy; "let us unmoor, and be off, lest we miss them again.
Farewell, your grace and lordships--come, Davie Falconer, and thou,
too, Barton; let us go."

"You will take one cup of wine ere you leave us, admiral," said Angus.

"I crave leave to be excused," said Wood; "I have drunk many a pot of
wine here with my auld messmate, Andrew Barton; but I will never bend
a bicker with those who are in arms against his master--for had puir
Andrew been alive, he had stood by my side to-day; so let us bear
away, then--the sky is clear, as the saw saith,

  'When the clouds spread like a feather,
  Mariner look for fair gude weather.'

We'll sight these Englishmen to-night, and overhaul them before
morning."

Glad to be rid of one whose loyalty and inflexible truth were likely
to prove troublesome, and perhaps infectious, the barons in reality
cared very little whether Sir Andrew vanquished the English or was
sunk by them; for, like true Scottish peers, the national honour to
them was nothing when conflicting with their own private ends.  As
the three kingsmen left the house, they saw two ladies at one of the
lower windows waving their handkerchiefs through the basketted
grating, careless whether pages, grooms, or men-at-arms observed
them.  These were Sybilla and Euphemia Drummond.  For a minute the
lovers loitered to exchange a word and glance.

"Thou art welcome, thrice welcome to my father's house, Lady Effie,"
said Barton; "and one day I hope to see its porch bedecked with white
garlands in thine honour, when coming home as its lawful mistress;
but that must be when the tide of fortune turns, for sorely hath it
now set in against the loyal and true; so we, dear Effie, must thole
it with the others.  I see how the land lies still with the old lord,
thy father; but we'll weather the reefs yet, please God, Effie."

Poor Falconer could only kiss the soft white hand of Sybilla, and
give her one deep and sorrowful glance, when Lord Home, who would
gladly have fallen on him, sword in hand, but for the safety of their
hostages, came furiously forward, and the two lovers hurried after
the admiral, who was impatiently waiting for them at the outer gate.

"Bear on, Robbie," said he, "we have no leisure now for backing and
filling, or toying and kissing hands.  Doth not thy heart glow with a
double hope of vengeance at the sight of thy father's rooftree and
wasted substance?  Well-a-day," he added, as they hastened through
St. Nicholas Wynd, "our poor king, after beating to windward all his
life against the dark current of adversity, perhaps is gone now, as
his grandsire went before him--sain him God!  And though I will
rather scuttle the old frigate than lower my colours or vail my
topsails to those sharks of barons, yet thou seest, messmate, we must
e'en bear up before this civil tempest, and scud under bare poles,
for fear of losing all; but were I sure that the king was in life, by
the bones of St. Rule, I would not lift tack or sheet to humour the
best lord in the land!"

"But then the English fleet?"

"Ay, true, there thou hast the weathergage of me; yes, we must fight
in honour and conscience, whether lord, earl, or laird, king or
chancellor commanded us or not; ship your oars, my lads, and shove
off for the ship," he cried, as they sprang on board the barge, just
in time to prevent a violent collision between some of her crew and
the Angus spearmen, who had been provoked by the taunts and abuse of
Cuddie Clewline the coxswain.  This "ancient mariner," whose
weatherbeaten visage was puckered up like a knot on an oak tree,
possessed a vocabulary of abuse that was pretty extensive; and he had
been perambulating the pier, spitting on his hard horny hands, and
throwing mortal defiances right and left among the vassals of the
Lord of Galloway, boasting that he did not value "their steel
trappings or iron jacks a ropes-end or a brass bodle."

As the barge, with its colour waving, shot out of the sunny harbour,
the crews of the merchant craft and Hanse traders gave the well-known
admiral a hearty cheer, and his oarsmen, as they bent to their task
and almost lifted their light craft out of the water, sung that merry
old Scottish sea-song, which is mentioned in the prologues of Bishop
Gawain Douglas--

  "The ship sails owre ye saut sea faem,
  Yat rowes on ye rocks o' our native hame;"

while Cuddie sat in the prow, flourishing his boat hook in defiance
to the soldiers on the bridge and pier.

Ere the last notes of the song and the plash of the oars had been
lost in the boom of the surf that broke on the reefs then known as
the Musselcape and Beacon Rock, Sir Patrick Gray rushed down St.
Nicholas Wynd, crossed the bridge, and hurried to the Kirkgate,
where, in the _Bell of St. Anthony_, a well-known hostel, he found
his minion, Sir Hew Borthwick, whom he scarcely knew, so splendidly
was he attired; for the price of James's signet-ring (long since
transmitted by the Governor of Berwick to London) had lined his
pockets with something better than pebbles, and enabled him to ruin
all the pages, pimps, and bullies about the prince's court at
tric-trac and shovel-board.

"Ride, Borthwick, ride," said Gray, breathlessly, as he roughly drew
him into a corner; "for death and life ride to Dunbar; here is
money--six half lions (about thirty shillings); get thee a skiff, and
seek the English Captain Howard.  Warn him that Wood is putting to
sea--say his fleet is overwhelming.  Anathema!  Oh, the fool, the
half-witted English lurdane, to be loitering yet in Scottish waters
with that devilish damsel in his possession!  If she is taken, her
tongue will destroy us all; she must be flung overboard, with all the
ciphers of Quentin Kraft, if the _Harry_ is captured; see to this on
your life, Hew Borthwick, see to it!  Away, while there is yet
time--away!"

In ten minutes after this the regicide, well mounted, left Leith by
the Porte St. Anthony, and crossing the Links, struck eastward by the
dreary Figgate Muir, riding at headlong speed towards Dunbar.

It was about four o'clock in the evening, and as these "Scottish
worthies" separated, each mentally bequeathed the other to the
infernal shades.




CHAPTER XL.

CLEARED FOR ACTION.

  "The boat rocks at the pier o' Leith,
    Fu' loud the wind blaws down the ferry,
  The ships ride at the Berwick Law,
    And I maun leave my bonnie Mary."--_Scottish Song_.


As his barge glided into the stream, and Leith with its pier, spires,
and sandy links, melted into the sunny haze; as the harbour closed
and narrowed astern; the admiral, after remaining long silent,
exclaimed,--

"Well---split my topsails, if I would not rather endure the English
fire, yardarm and yard arm for eight glasses, than overhall all this
talk again with these herring-faced lordlings; but one day, gadzooks!
I hope to make the best among them lower his ancient at the king's
name."

"They have cast a glamour over the Lord Drummond," said Barton, with
a gloomy expression in his eyes; "he was kind to me once, and but for
my father's death and this unhappy strife, I had been ere now his
son-in-law, and holding a banquet, perhaps, in yonder hall, where all
that rabble rout of hostile peers hold council."

"Thy fair weather and smooth anchorage are coming, Robert," said the
admiral; "and what sayst thou, Davie Falconer?"

"That fickle fortune, I fear me, will never tire of persecuting one
who ever courts her smiles; though sooth to say, I never fear her
frowns.  Poor Lady Sybilla, how sad, how pale she looked!"

"Be not cast down, Falconer," continued the kind old Laird of Largo,
on seeing the arquebussier gazing dreamily at the tall house of
Barton, which stood like a watch-tower on the left bank of the Leith;
"be not heavy o' heart, because thy purse is at low water; thou shalt
have thy winsome bride yet, my lad!  And if the king gives thee not
land, thou shalt never lack siller while auld Andrew Wood hath a shot
in his locker.  Thy father's son, Davie, shall beat to windward, and
keep in the line of battle with the best craft in the fleet.  The
happiest occurrence in the voyage of life is to be brought to by a
bonny young lass."

"How wobegone young Rothesay looked to-day," said Falconer.

"Ah! there our king (God bless him!) was wrong," said the admiral;
"he should have given the lad a longer swing to his cable, or a
little more headway, in the matter of running after the winsome dames
at court, as young princes will do at times.  The tide of experience
would soon have brought him into deep water.  I know that, though an
auld sailor, who (St. Mary be thanked) knoweth as much anent courts
and cities as a seamew may; but hilloh! what is astir here?" he
added, as the barge sneered alongside the Yellow Caravel, and two
very ominous loops were seen to dangle from her foreyard-arms.

History informs us that the admiral had just returned in time to save
his two noble hostages from being hung; for the crew having become
alarmed by his long stay on shore, were preparing--by order of Sir
Alexander Mathieson, who took command in his absence--with great
deliberation to run George Lord Seaton and John Lord Fleming to the
yardheads; and the poor nobles (both good and worthy men) were in the
very act of making their peace with Heaven, through the intervention
of Father Zuill, when the admiral stepped on board, and at once
despatched them on shore, where the account they gave to Angus and
others of their treatment, made the peers more than ever dread and
abhor the Laird of Largo and his crews.

"Tell the spearmen o' the Lord Angus," shouted Cuddie over the side,
as their boat was shoved off, "that d--n my auld buits if----"

"Peace, coxswain," said Barton; "thou ever becomest crank when
lacking ballast, or when thine orlof is overstowed with usquebaugh;
so, silence--man the tackles, and hoist the boats on board."

"Lords, indeed!" muttered the admiral, as he walked aft; "were my
honour not pledged, I would fain have belayed the dogsons to the
whipping-post, and given them a round dozen with a rope's end, just
as a fare-ye-well.  But heave short on the anchor, Barton--cast loose
the courses, and make sail on the ship."

History (to which in these chapters we are obliged to have constant
reference) informs us, that though the admiral had several ships at
his disposal, and the English squadron consisted of five sail, he
somewhat unwisely resolved "to take _only his own two_," meaning the
_Yellow Frigate_ and the _Queen Margaret_, which had been built at
the Newhaven, under his own eye; and so, after desiring the other
armed vessels, whose captains adhered to him and the cause of the
missing king, to cruise between Leith Roads, St. Margaret's Hope, and
Alloa, to cut off the communication of the insurgents with Fife, he
weighed anchor, and stood down the river about six in the evening,
favoured by a gentle south-west wind.

There were great preparations made for battle on board these two
stately ships, as under a press of canvas, they bore down the Forth,
between Inchkeith and those two reefs known as the Briggs and the
Craigness, and steered for the Isle of May, which lay north-east by
east, but was not visible from that part of the river.  The admiral
and his officers remained in their harness.  Willie Wad and his
yeomen hoisted powder up from the magazine; the boatswain was
preparing all the culverins on the long and clumsy slides then in
use; the arquebussiers put fresh matches to the serpentine cocks of
their firearms; filled their priming horns, and buckled on their
bullet-bags, which were hung at the right hip, and all were on deck
in their jazarine jackets and steel caps, swords, and daggers.  The
seamen were accoutred in nearly a similar manner, and armed
themselves from the racks of Jedwood axes, hand-guns, and
boarding-pikes, that were framed round the masts and the bulwarks of
the poop.  All were noisy, loquacious, and enthusiastic, save a few
of the quiet married men, whose wives and little ones were watching
their departure from the shore.

"Away aloft, Cuddie--get into the fore-crosstrees," said the admiral,
"and thou shalt have a can of egg-flip and three silver bonnet pieces
the moment ye sight these English ships.  Will she not carry more,
Barton?"

"Not without leaving Sir Alexander too far astern; but we may try:
master boatswain, rig me a guy on the spanker-boom, sheet home the
mizen-staysail, and up with that cross-jackyard a bit."

This primitive contrivance has now been replaced by the gaff, and to
the lower end of it the staysail was then bent on.  Though the summer
evening was then bright on shore, a thick white haze arose from the
broad estuary, and hid the land on both sides.  The admiral became
merry as the river widened, and the May arose in a faint blue line at
the horizon; and he said to the gunner,--

"Pass the word, Willie, to Father Zuill, to quit the mass-book--to
overhaul his hurdy-gurdy, and ship on its mirrors, for gadzooks, we
will be aboard the English in another hour or two."

"Carry those shot to their guns, Willie Wad," said Barton, kicking
away some balls that were rolling about the deck; "no iron should
ever come within seven feet of a binnacle."

The wind soon became lighter and more aft; and as the yards were
squared more, the staysails began to shiver.  The vessels were now
going slowly through the water, and cleaving a shining passage that
left a long wake astern.  The sun of June set brilliantly behind the
distant Ochils; the shores were mellowed in haze; but above it, the
peculiar hill of North Berwick rose on the starboard bow, gleaming in
the western light like a volcanic cone of flame.  As the glow faded
on the waters, a light, like a gigantic star, began to beam among the
hills astern.

This was Saint Anthony's Light--a beacon which was burned by the good
and charitable Hospitallers of St. Anthony upon the tower of their
hermitage on the rocks above Holyrood.  This tower was then more than
forty feet high, and thus its light was seen far down the estuary, in
which it was the only beacon in those days; for there was then no
Pharos on Inchkeith (which belonged to _Keith_, the Earl Marischal),
and was without a night-beacon until the early part of the
seventeenth century.  The island, in the time of James III., was a
place of compulsory retirement for lepers and other sick persons; and
was a famous resort of water-cows and kelpies; and on the rocks there
the mermaids, with curling tails, a looking-glass in one hand and a
comb in the other, are _still to be seen_, as more than one hardy
boatman of Newhaven, and pious elder of the Fishwives Kirk, are ready
to aver on oath, especially when the moon is S. by W., and the tide
is full between Granton and Kinghorn.




CHAPTER XLI.

THE ENGLISH BOAT.

      "St Abb, St. Helen, and St. Bey,
      All built kirks near unto the sea;
  St. Abb's upon the Nabs, and St. Helen's on the Lea,
  But St. Bey's upon Dunbar sands is nearest to sea!"--_Old Rhyme._


Meanwhile, the worthy messenger of the worthy knight, Sir Patrick
Gray, captain of Broughty, was riding hard towards the east.  To
avoid question by the gateward, who kept the bridge and toll of
Musselburgh, he swam his horse through the river, near the church of
St. Michael the Archangel, and dashed through Pinkie-woods, over
Tranentmuir and Hoprigmains, and never drew his bridle until King
David's royal burgh of Dunbar and the massive towers of that noble
fortress, which was then considered the key of East Lothian, rose
before him; and from the higher ground, as he approached the bare and
sea-beaten promontory on which they stand, he could perceive five
English vessels cruising in the offing, or deep water, and almost
becalmed between the mainland and the May.

Three of these were indeed the vessels of Howard, who, when on his
homeward voyage, had been joined off Holy Island by two large armed
vessels, under Miles Furnival, sent by Henry VII. from the Thames,
with orders to pillage the coast of Scotland, and (in fulfilment of
the old and invariable policy of the English kings) to take every
advantage of the intestine broils of Scotland to distress and harass
the people, that they might the more willingly listen to his
proposals, when the project of the prince's marriage with Margaret
Tudor was revived--a foolish and mistaken policy, as the Scots were
ever the last people in the world to be wooed by cold steel and
gunpowder.

Feeling appetised after his long ride, Sir Patrick's messenger reined
up his foam-flecked charger at the _Dunbar Arms_, an hostel in the
Highgate, where he ordered a cup of Malvoisie, a pair of roasted
plovers, and a quail, with sweet sack, for he felt able to devour a
horse, after his long ride near the seacoast; and he resolved, that
though the evening was drawing on, affairs of state should wait his
pleasure.

"How happy are the rich," thought he, with a sigh of enjoyment, after
he had drained the last of his sack, and picked the last bone of the
quail; "how often have I fed my hopes when I had little wherewith to
feed my stomach," he added, clinking the English gold pieces, with
which his purse was now so well lined, and which went current in
Scotland, as Scottish coins did in England, for then the coin of all
nations was circulated everywhere; "but this country will grow too
hot for me ere long, so I must e'en turn spy on Henry, and win in
England the lyons, louis, and angels of the new king, James
IV.--ugh!" and he smiled a ferocious smile, "he owes his crown to
_me_!  But now to reach these devilish ships anent that damsel, who I
would with all my soul was sleeping with her fathers."

He now went on foot to the harbour, where, though the sea was calm,
there was considerable agitation in the water, for Dunbar is the most
bleak and stormy headland on the coast; but he found that no money
would tempt the fishermen to put him on board of any of those English
vessels, which were lying, almost becalmed, about two miles off; and
he soon ceased to ask them, as their suspicions were readily excited,
and there were not a few who threatened to drag him before the
provost, that he might be forced to "declare what manner of business
he, a Scot, had on board these hostile craft."

This threat made him tremble, for now he had three tenements in
Stirling, with a remarkably well-lined purse; and if "the sudden
possession of gold will make a brave man cautious," how much more so
will it render timid a dastardly regicide?

Hastily leaving the fishermen, he walked for nearly a mile along the
sands, on which the surf was rolling with considerable force, and
gazed anxiously at the English ships, which were all within two miles
of each other, with their high lumbering poops, their carved and
gilded quarter-galleries, and the muzzles of their brass cannon
shining in the last rays of the sunlight that lingered in the west;
and Borthwick stamped his feet with anger, for he supposed that
Wood's ships must, by this time, have dropped far down the river, and
that shots would soon be exchanged.

Upon the level shore, close to the seamark, there stood in those days
the chapel of St. Bey, who was daughter of a certain Saxon king.
This princess, according to local tradition, had emigrated among the
Scots with her two sisters, St. Abb and St. Helen, who, being meek,
gentle, and pious, were disgusted with the world and the barbaric
pomp of their father's petty court, and resolved to spend their
dowers in the erection of churches, and their lives in devotion.  All
these three votaresses having a curious predilection for salt water,
endeavoured to find sites as near the sea as possible.  St. Helen
built her oratory on a plain, near the beach, and St. Abb raised hers
on that high rock which overhangs the German Ocean, while St. Bey
succeeded in founding her fane so close to the floodmark that at
every full tide the waves washed its massive walls; and hence arose
the Lothian rhyme prefixed to this chapter.

Thinking little of St. Abb, St. Helen, or St. Bey, Hew Borthwick, on
passing the chapel of the latter, suddenly found himself seized by a
party of seamen, whom, by the fashion of their gabardines, and the
sound of their voices, he knew at once to be English; and close by
was a large boat, well laden with several sacks of flour, three
sheep, and a quantity of vegetables, all taken from an adjacent farm;
for this foraging party were numerous and well armed.

"Yoho, brother; whom seek ye?" demanded one, who grasped Borthwick by
the throat--yet the craven dared not to draw his sword.

"I seek some one who will take me on board the _Harry_, for I have an
urgent message to the captain."

"Concerning the damosel aboard, I have little doubt," replied the
seaman, who was no other than Dick Selby, the gunner; "I ever said
little luck would come to Eddy Howard by having this painted galley
in tow."

"Nay, Dick," said another, "she be no galley, but a noble lady."

"A Scots one, though.  Well, and what want ye with the captain, eh?"

"How can the Scot answer thee, Dick," interfered another, "when
thou'st twisted his mouth all to starboard; why, 'tis all on one
side, like the ballast-port of a timber-ship."

"Teach thy grannum to make sackwhey!  I warrant thee I'll make the
Scot find his tongue.  Speak!" roared the gunner, giving Borthwick a
furious shake.

"I have an urgent message for your captain, which none must know but
he," gasped Borthwick, in a half-strangled voice; "look at me,
sirs--some of you must have seen me on board before now?"

"Tarry a minute, gunner Dick," said a soldier who was in half mail,
and had but one eye; "I _have_ seen this man before, methinks."

"Off Taymouth--at night," said Borthwick.

"I remember me now," said the soldier, who was Anthony Arblaster;
"unhand him, Dick, ere worse come of it, for the captain's temper
hath been truly devilish of late."

"We have had a long spell on this here shore," growled the gunner, as
he released the throat of Borthwick, whose lace doublet was no way
improved by the application of such a hard and tarry hand as Dick's;
"we have turned our best barge into a bumboat, as ye may see, so come
aboard and let us shove off, before some of your furious Scots come
after their flour-sacks.  I would to St. George they were all, for
the trouble they give us, steering in the latitude of purgatory!"

"Or a warmer latitude still," added Anthony Arblaster, rubbing his
blind eye.

"Avast," said an old sailor, "and remember there is a Scot here, and
that he be but one among many."

But the said Scot, though boiling with rage at his treatment, cared
little for national reflections; yet, had these honest English hearts
known the actual character of the wretch they had on board, they
would have flung him into the sea, lest they should never more have
fortune on its waters.

"Ship your oars, my hearts," said the gunner; "and harkee, Arblaster,
bear a-hand, old dead-eye, and belay these here quadrupeds to the
thwarts, or we may lose them in the surf."

The boat was bluffly built, and being full of men, and moreover
heavily laden, she laboured through the breakers which roll for ever
on those sands, and shipped a great quantity of spray before her head
was fairly turned towards the _Harry_, which was astern of all the
other vessels, all of which were lying with their heads towards the
river.  The uneasiness manifested by Borthwick, as the spray flew
over his rich cloak and doublet, afforded extreme gratification to
the hardy seamen who had nothing to spoil, and whose oars bent almost
to breaking, as they strained between the tholing-pins, and shot the
heavy barge from one long roller to another.

After they had pulled a mile from the shore, and saw the Castle of
Dunbar rising with all its strong red towers and crenellated ramparts
in many a frowning row, bristling with cannon and black loop-holes,
the one-eyed archer, who was seated in the stern, uttered a shout of
astonishment:--

"Hilloah, old Buff," said the gunner; "what is the matter?"

"There are two large ships standing down the river!"

"Sir Andrew Wood, for a thousand rose nobles!" said the gunner,
slapping his thigh; "thou hast the true eye of an English archer,
Tony, thof thou'st but one; well, I thought we should not make out
two days of a quiet cruise here.  Give way, my hearts--give way! odds
firkin, they are bringing down both wind and tide with
them--yare--yare--stretch out!"

"It _is_ the Admiral Wood," said Borthwick, with gloomy spite, "and
my message to your captain concerns him."

"They are hull down as yet, though," said the gunner, as he stood up
and shaded his weather-beaten visage with his thick knotty hand;
"well--odds my life, bold as he is--and a better seamen never spliced
a rope, Scot though he be, I do not think Sir Andrew, with only two
ships, will venture to attack us; and we'll see him haul his wind ere
another half-glass is run."

The ships of Wood were about nine miles off, being abreast of North
Berwick, and they loomed large through the haze of the summer
gloaming, which, however, was rising from the water as the moon,
which was round and full, soared into the clear blue sky, above the
hills of East Lothian.  The Ness of Fife was not visible in the haze,
for at this extreme point the noble Forth is more than twenty miles
broad.




CHAPTER XLII.

THE LOVER AND THE SPY.

  "O, she says nothing, sir, but weeps and weeps,
  And now falls on her bed."--Shakespeare.


The approaching vessels had been descried already from the ships of
Howard, who fired a cannon to quicken his boat; and the moment it was
on board and hoisted in, with its provisions he desired all to be
cleared away for battle, and ordered Borthwick to attend him in his
cabin.

"Well, thou bird of ill omen," said he, while arming himself, "what
evil wind hath blown thee on board the _Harry_ to-night?  Speak out,
and briefly, too; try none of thy cobler tricks with me."

"I have come with a message from the Lords at Leith----"

"Ah! they are there, then; and the rumours we have heard are true:
has the King of Scotland fought a battle and been defeated?"

"Yes, and hath fled, no man knows whither," said Borthwick, with a
dark smile on his pale face, while he could not repress a twinge of
uneasiness at the mention of the king's name, for he saw ever before
him--when alone for a moment--that ghastly corpse, lying where he had
flung it, in the ditch beside the Bannock.

"And so young Rothesay now is king," said Howard, sadly, and pausing
while he braced his corslet.

"No--nor can be, until we ascertain that the king, his father, is
dead."

"Of course; well, and what want your rebel lords with me?"

"I should have said Sir Patrick Gray."

"Well, well--speak quickly; for the foe comes on.  Your message----"

"Concerns the Lady Margaret Drummond, and your bond in cipher with
the Scottish friends of King Henry."

"Well," said Howard again, buckling his waist-belt with a furious
jerk; "what of them?"

"Wood is about to attack you, and you must be well aware that if the
_Harry_ is taken, and these are found on board--the lady and the
bond,--the hope of Henry's alliance will be crushed by her being
discovered, and the safety of his allies in Scotland will be
compromised by the documents."

"The curse of all the saints be on King Henry's plots and on those
Scottish cravens who pander to the pay, the wiles, and selfish ends
of England!" said Howard, with great bitterness.  "Well, fellow, and
what would your Laird of Kyneff advise?"

"That this troublesome dame be hove overboard, with Master Kraft's
writings and the deep-sea lead tied together to her neck----"

"Confound thee, thou limb of Satan!--thou infamous and lubberly
lurdane!" cried Howard, in a tempest of rage at this terrible
proposition.  "Begone," he added, smiting Borthwick on the mouth with
his steel glove; "begone, sheer off; or by all that is sacred in
heaven, I will have thee bound to a kedge, and flung overboard like
St. Clement!  Yoho there, Will Selby!" he said to his page, who stood
without the cabin, "is that fisher-boat, which we took off Tyningham
sands, astern yet?"

The page replied that it was.

"Then see this ruffian put into her; give the two fishermen a handful
of tokens, and bid them cast off and begone, in the devil's name,
lest I hang this recreant Scot where I fain would hang his masters."

In two minutes after this our knight of the scarlet mantle found
himself hustled over the side of the _Harry_ into a shore-boat, in
which were two poor fishermen, who, after receiving a handful of
those leaden pledges which the English used in the time of their
seventh and eighth Henries in lieu of copper coinage, gladly pulled
away for Tyningham Sands, where their wives and children had been
waiting for them in sore apprehension and weeping the livelong day.
Anxious to get clear of the engagement which was to take place, they
stepped their mast, hoisted their sail, and prayed hard to St. Bey
for a favourable breeze; but little wind came, and even that was
against them; so they bequeathed the poor saint to the devil, spat on
their hands, and betook them to their oars, like men.

"Thank Heaven, my ship is freed from the contamination of such a
wretch," said Howard; "though 'twere not worth while to lose my
temper with him.  By St. George, I profit little by old Caxton's
'Book of Good Manners;' though I have studied it more than stars or
compass since Margaret Drummond came on board."

The handsome Howard was now completely armed, and presented himself
at the cabin of Margaret, whose attendants, Cicely and Rose, had
acquainted her of the dire preparations making on deck overhead.
Sorrow and confinement had rendered her so pale that she was like a
beautiful marble statue, and her exceeding fairness was rendered
stronger by her dark purple dress, and the triangular cap of the same
material which shaded her fine hair, the locks of which shone like
golden tresses in the light of the cabin lamp.  On beholding Howard
in his armour she started forward to meet him.

"Dear madam," said he, "I am come--to--to--"

"To restore me to my family," said Margaret, with sweet earnestness;
"is it not so? you will--you will do so now; for I have been told
that the king's admiral approaches to demand me."

"Nay, lady, I came but to convey you to a place of safety," paid he;
"you are misinformed, for none in Scotland (three villains excepted)
know that you are here, or that you are in the land of the living.
The king was accused of abducting you, and he has lost a bloody
battle near Stirling, fought by the nobles."

"And my father fought against him?"

"Very probably."

Margaret clasped her white hands in fear and misery.

"And what tidings are there of the Duke of Rothesay?"

"I have heard of none," said Howard, on whom that name when uttered
by her lips, fell as a mortal blight.  "Lady Drummond, we are about
to engage in a close, and, it must be, desperate conflict, with the
king of the Scottish mariners, and it may be that you will never
again be troubled by the voice or presence of Edmund Howard.  Oh,
think over all I have dared to urge, during the many days it has been
my happiness to know you and to seek your esteem.  You know my
secret; say, if I survive to-night, may I hope for something more
than friendship?"

"Your secret," reiterated Margaret, as her fine blue eyes filled with
tears; "alas, fair sir, you know not _mine_.  I admire and most
sincerely respect you, Edmund Howard; but more I dare not say--so, I
beseech you, cease to urge me further on this most painful subject."

"True, true," said Howard, beating his breast, "I have indeed but
little to offer you compared with what you have lost.  It may be
weakness----"

"The weakness of the strong man and of the gallant heart."

"Alas! in love we ever carry more sail than ballast--who can control
the heart in love----"

"If you knew _all_, you never again would address me thus.  Oh, talk
not of love to me--it is in vain, nor dare I listen."

"Alas, that I should hear this doom from your own lips at last, lady!
I will quit this wandering life of mariner, for I have one of those
happy homes that are only to be found in England; where the woods are
green, and our painted windows open down to soft and sunny lawns,
instead of iron grates that grimly peer through deep fosses and
guarded barbicans, as here in Scotland, lady.  There no rude barons,
or lawless lairds, ride from tower to tower with spears and torches
in their train, no hostile clansmen wage eternal war, making their
life but a mission of military vengeance and feudal hatred; and there
no venal peers are ever ready to sell their country and their king,
her rights or her honour for foreign gold.  Oh no; in merry England
we know nothing of transmitted hatred, of Highland raids and border
forays.  I love you, lady, well, and, with you, I fain would share
that quiet English home; I love you passionately, and denial is
death, and worse than death to me! and I say so now when on the eve
of battle with one who was never foiled or vanquished on the sea.  In
that happy home, if spared to see it, I could worship you as a monk
who serves his altar, and treasure you as a miser hoards his
treasure.  Oh do not turn from me as if I was hateful," continued
Howard, borne away by his passion and finding eloquence in the very
depth of it; "'tis true I am an Englishman, lady, and that you are a
Scot--but can a few miles of land or of water make such an evil
difference in our tempers or our race----"

"Oh no, it is not hate that makes me turn away, but true sorrow for
yourself, my good and noble Howard," said Margaret, as she pressed
his hands in hers; for his honest passion and gentle bearing touched
her to the soul, and no woman ever hears a man say he loves her
without feeling a more than common interest in him; but happily for
both, this painful interview was cut short by the stentorian voice of
John o'Lynne, who cried through the poop door,--

"Yoho, Captain Howard; the Scots are within a mile of us and bring
down the breeze with them, and it freshens fast."

This reminded Howard of what he had forgotten,--that he had come, not
to make love, but to conduct his fair prisoner and her two pretty
attendants, Rose and Cicely, to a place of security, which he now
proceeded to do.  They were accordingly conducted between-decks, amid
a tremendous uproar, for in one quarter Dick Selby was hoisting up
shot and powder from the magazine, in another, boxes, chests, and
bulkheads were going down, and hammocks being triced up, while the
shrill whistle of the boatswain, the swearing and noise of the
seamen, made the place terrible to them; and from the lower deck they
descended by a ladder and the light of a lantern into a dreary and
Cimmerian gulf, from which arose the combined odours of bilge and
rancid beef, stale cheese, tarry ropes, and other agreeable perfumes,
such as usually pervade the region of the cockpit.  And there, in a
curtained and cushioned berth, below the water-line, he left them to
their prayers, and with a sigh ascended to the maindeck of the
_Harry_; and then his spirit rose as he breathed more freely.

"Dick Selby,--up with the battle-lanterns, and beat to quarters!"
said he: "John o'Lynne, make sail on the ship; see, the _Cressi_ will
first engage these petulant Scots; stand to your culverins, my lads
fore and aft, if you would not brook a Scottish prison, oatmeal, and
iron fetters, before we see merry England again!"

And bravely every man in the good ship _Harry_ stood by his gun, and
drew tighter the buckles of his helmet and girdle.




CHAPTER XLIII.

THE BATTLE OF THE MAY.

  "He ha' brass within and steel without,
   With beams on his top-castle strong;
  And eighteen pieces of ordnance,
    He carries on each side along.
  And he hath a pinnace dight,
    St. Andrew's cross is his guide;
  The pinnace beareth nine score men,
    And fifteen guns on each side."
                              _Sir Andro Burton_


The wind had freshened as the _Yellow Frigate_ and her consort bore
down the river, and confident in the great size, heavy armament, and
complete equipment of those vessels which Sir Alexander Wood was so
fond of styling "his own two," he walked to and fro on the poop,
whistling for more wind, and all undaunted by the reported strength
of the enemy, though Barton, Falconer, and Sir Alexander Mathieson
deemed him rash and unwary in leaving so many of his vessels to
cruise idly in the river.  As the land lessened, Preston Bay opened
out on one side and the far-stretching bight of Largo on the other.
By this time the five English vessels were in sight, scattered
considerably apart, but their white sails were distinctly visible on
the dusky blue of the darkening sea and sky.  Falconer and Barton
were accoutred in polished steel, and were armed with Jedwood axes,
sword, and dagger.  After having inspected the culverins, moyennes,
and sakers with which the forecastle, poop, and main-deck were
mounted--after having seen that the bores were clean, the wadding
tight, and tackles clear--Willie Wad was placidly regaling himself on
cold salt junk and a can of beer with the coxswain of the barge, who
was drinking ale from an old gallipot.

Archy the boatswain, and his mate (or yeoman, as they were then
named), worked at a grindstone, putting a keener edge on their
two-handed swords, axes, and boarding pikes, while they whistled and
sang as the sparks of the grinding steel flew to leeward through the
open ports; and close by them was a grim old arquebussier, who had
served at the siege of Lochmaben, under James II., against the
Douglases at Brechin, and at the Bog of Dunkinty, notching his leaden
balls with a cross for good luck; and now the Admiral, whose mind was
occupied by the hope of victory, was joined by Father Zuill, who
under his cassock wore a jazarine jacket and steel gloves, which he
was at no pains to conceal.

"Harkee, timoneer," said the Admiral, "keep her head away a point or
two towards the north.  Yonder headmost ship I take to be the
_Cressi_, and if so, I will play her a trick I have not tried since
we fought the Portuguese under Antonio de Belem, and sunk his _Lady
of Sorrow_.  Gadzooks! that Englishman saileth as if he would poke
the wind's eye out!  We will have a brave moonlight night, Father
Zuill; see how brightly she rises above the Lammermuirs."

"Yet I would rather this bout took place by sunlight."

"Why--what! art at thy plaguey burning-glasses again?"

"Thou knowest, Admiral, that Marcellus used his mirrors both in
summer and winter----"

"Nay, I know nothing of the kind."

"Unless they were to trim his beard by," said Falconer.

"Out on thee, Davie," said the Admiral; "don't mock our friar, though
he hath more crotchets in his poor head than there be strands in a
nine-inch cable."

"Yes," mused the priest; "he used them even in the coldest winters
against the ships of an enemy; but there is no record of moonbeams
setting ought on fire."

"Odds life!  I should think not, friar," said the Admiral, looking
aloft, and watching the sails of the frigate.

"Would that I could assure thee, Sir Andrew, how a combination of
mirrors, all reflecting heat on one point, could set the great globe
itself on fire; then how much more so a miserable caravel?"

"Let me see the caravel set on fire first, and I will consider about
the world after.  So-ho, Burton, the wind is veering round upon our
quarter."

"And thou shalt see it, Admiral; for when I construct my parabolic
speculum to burn at ten paces, one ten times its size shall consume
everything to cinders at a hundred paces.  'Tis plain as a pikestaff."

"Look ye, shipmate," said the Admiral, impatiently, "stick to thy
mass, and leave burning and cannonading to those whose trade it is;
the gunner to his lintstock, the steersman to his helm----"

"And the cook to the foresheet," interrupted the friar, petulantly
finishing the Admiral's invariable proverb, which he had picked up in
his old skipper days.  "Yet a time shall come when thou and all here
shall behold with wonder the effect of my parabolic speculum, when it
reflects the fierce solar rays to that point of fire which is the
true focus of the parabola."

"Perhaps so," replied the Admiral; "but I never mean to watch thy
devilish hurdy-gurdy again.  Dost remember when we were off Cape
Ushant, how nearly I was brained at the taffrail by the jibbing of
the mainboom, when watching these plaguey glasses with which you
promised to burn me a hole in the sails of a Spanish lugger?"

"Alas!  Laird of Largo," said the learned chaplain, sorrowfully,
"thou knowest nought of this noble science--nothing of optics;
nothing of epicycles, whose central circle is the circumference of a
greater; and nothing of crystalline spheres."

"Hillo! thou'rt at thy magic again," said the Admiral, angrily; "all
this is too deep for me, Father Zuill; I am out of soundings, look
ye; and if I dived into the abyss of this learning, I should never
come up again.  Look to the staysails, Barton--the wind cometh more
upon the beam."

The _Margaret_ was now half a mile astern.  After passing the Bass
Rock, they found the wind coming freshly from the south, and saw the
English ships closing up fast as they caught the breeze; but still
the _Cressi_ was far ahead of the _Harry_, and though a small vessel,
which mounted only twenty pieces of ordnance, with a crew of about
two hundred men, she stood boldly towards the taller and heavier
Scot, with which her crew were intent on grappling--a _tactique_
peculiar to that age; but Wood had no intention of letting her do so,
and resolved to rid himself of her company, by serving her as he had
served the Admiral of Portugal, when he fought him off the Rock of
Lisbon, a few years before.

The light haze had now cleared away from the bosom of the estuary;
from a clear, unclouded sky, a gorgeous moon shed a flood of
brilliant light upon the wide blue waters, on the coast of East
Lothian, that lay sleeping in the silvery distance; on the nearer
bluffs of the castled Bass and the low, flat Isle of May, that lay
far off towards the north and east.  The waves were dancing in green
light tipped with silver foam, as they rolled between continent and
isle, and the English vessels, with all their canvas set, as they
stood towards the foe, looked like gigantic swans or sea-birds
floating on the deep.

A red flash from the high forecastle of the _Cressi_ was followed by
a gush of pale blue smoke, and then the iron ball of a carthoun
howled through the rigging of the frigate, and plunged into the water
far off.  This irritated the old Laird of Largo, who always loved to
have the first fire; and now he blew his whistle--the signal for
battle.

"Let fly at her tophamper, Willie Wad," he cried, as a line of lights
glittered along the gun-deck; "give us moonlight through her
canvas,--cut her cordage and unreeve her rigging."

Simultaneously a flood of red fire and white smoke burst from the low
waist and towering fore and _after-castles_ of the two ships, and a
storm of shot flew over each, the balls of the _Cressi_, many of them
stone bullets from King Henry's quarries at Maidstone, knocked great
white splinters from the painted hull and carved galleries of the
_Yellow Frigate_, and killed and wounded many of her men; while she
in turn cut to pieces the rigging of her enemy, and thus rendered her
motions slow and her management difficult.

"We must rid ourselves of this hornet before we engage her
companions," said Sir Andrew; "put the ship about, Barton, and
remember our prank with the Portuguese."

"'Bout ship," cried Barton, after a few preparations, putting the
trumpet through his open helmet; "helm's a-lee;--let go, and haul!"

Round swung the ponderous ship, while loose shot and everything else
rolled from windward to leeward, as she stood off on the opposite
tack, as if about to creep in shore and fly; and now the increasing
breeze filled her canvas, and careened her gracefully over on that
bright moonlit sea, which her bows cleft as an arrow cleaves the air.
Astonished to find the dreaded Laird of Largo fly before them, the
crew of the Cressi gave three hearty English cheers, and had the
hardihood to make all sail in chase, firing the light falcons of
their forecastle as fast as the cannoniers could bring them to bear
upon the towering stern and quarter of the Scot, who while returning
the fire, tacked twice, as if to escape.

"Barton, take thou the helm," said Wood, "and keep at your quarters,
my yeomen of the sheets and braces.  Yo-ho, boatswain! take in all
the small sails."

On seeing this, in their nautical or national confidence on the sea,
the English crew again believed that now Wood was about to grapple
with them, and natheless his superior size, they had no doubt of
being able to engage and retain him valiantly until the _Harry_,
which was a mile astern, came up.

Though it was an age in which navigation was destitute of many modern
inventions and appliances, Wood was as famous for the skilful manner
in which he handled his ship as for the bravery with which he fought
her, for under his orders, her vast hull, with its towering rigging
and cloud of sail, was like a toy.  Thus, after a few manoeuvres, the
_Cressi_ lay to, and continued firing briskly at the _Yellow
Frigate_, which her crew believed was about to run alongside; but in
rounding to, her captain, though a brave mariner, had given Wood the
advantage of the wind, and while her crew poured in their missiles,
cannon and arquebuse-shot, with those clothyard shafts so famed in
English war, Barton suddenly put the helm hard up, at a sign from the
Admiral, who cried with the voice of a stentor,--

"Yeomen of the braces and bowlines, let go! slack off your sheets and
tacks,---yare, my hearts,--yare, and square the yards."

It was all the work of a moment; the blocks creaked, the cordage
whistled, the canvas flapped heavily, and filled again, at the
tremendous bow of the Scottish caravel was suddenly brought to bear
directly upon the broadside of the _Cressi_, whose captain had no
time to fill his yards or forge ahead again, for dire confusion and
dismay pervaded his crowded decks, from which a hundred mingled cries
of rage, wonder, and defiance arose.  And there she lay, in the deep
valley formed by the long-swelling waves, while her crew bravely
fired their culverins at the _Yellow Frigate_, which bore down under
a cloud of canvas, looming like the shadow of death between them and
the brilliant moon.

On, on she glided, almost noiselessly.

One wave alone separated them!

Then down she came thundering with her iron beak upon the enemy's
vessel, striking her right amidships.  The wild shriek of rage that
rose on one side was mingled with a shout of triumph on the other.
The _Yellow Frigate_ scarcely felt the shock, as she rode over the
low waist, and crashed through the torn rigging of the _Cressi_, the
lofty poop and forecastle of which fell inwards, as the hull was
cloven in two, and sunk for ever into that brilliant sea, the vortex
of which sucked down two hundred gallant men.

"For God's love, Sir Andrew, lower the boats," cried Falconer,
looking into the foam-covered whirlpool, where a few spars and casks,
with an occasional head or a hand, were rising and sinking.

"Impossible--even our pinnace would sink with her; but God sain
them," said the old Admiral; "there hath gone down many a brave
fellow, who will never more lift tack or sheet in this world!"

A loud cheer now rose close astern; it came from the crew of the
_Queen Margaret_; and both ships then bore on towards the enemy,
leaving the sea covered with the _débris_ of the wreck; and as the
old ballad says,--

  "Many was the feather-bed,
    That fluttered on the foam;
  And many was the gude lord's son,
    That never mair came home.

  "The ladies wrang their fingers white,
    The maidens tore their hair;
  A' for the sake o' those true loves,
    They never shall see mair."


"May they sleep as soundly in the Scottish sea as my father sleeps in
their Kentish downs," said Barton; "but many a blue corpselicht will
dance on these waters ere the sun of to-morrow rises."

"To your guns again, my merry men all," cried the Admiral "they are
two to one against us; but if we put them not to rout we were no
better than Gordon gowks, and there will be many a toom bowie and
kirn in Fife and Lothian.  Heed not King Henry's bitter almonds, for
I swear by my honour as a seaman and faith as a knight, that every
shipmate o' mine who loseth a fin, shall swing his hammock for life
in Largo Tower, and share the goods kind God hath given me; he shall
never lack a brass bodle or a can of ale while auld Andrew Wood hath
both to part with him fairly over the capstan head; so stand every
man to his quarters--put your faith in God and St. Andrew, and fight,
my lads, as you have often fought before, for auld Scotland and her
glory!"

This characteristic harangue was answered by a hurrah, and many a
weatherbeaten and well-bearded visage glowed redly along the gun-deck
when the matches were blown, and the waves sparkled in the moonlight,
as they ran merrily past the triced-up lids of the open ports through
which the brass culverins and guns of Scottish yetlin were run and
pointed, after being primed and shotted for battle.

"Sir David Falconer, send thine arquebussiers aft, line the taffrail
and fill the tops with them--away aloft!" cried the Admiral, "and
shame be on the last who is through the lubber's hole or over the
foot-hook shrouds!"

The arquebussiers clambered up the ratlins, and our marines of the
present day would be rather amused could they see such a sight as
those soldiers presented; heavily accoutred with back, breast, head,
and thigh pieces, bandoliers, flasks, and swords--and, more than all,
their long arquebusses, crawling like scaly armadilloes up the black
rigging.  However, they soon reached their perches, and levelled
their barrels over the little wooden battlement which then surrounded
the tops.  As it was now intended to come to what was termed "close
battle," there was no more manoeuvring; and all the adverse ships
bore down upon each other, firing their cannon briskly; while
arquebusses, pistolettes and calivers, with many a shaft from bow and
arblast were levelled from the tops, the poops, and forecastles--for
the brilliant moon enabled aim to be taken with precision; and as the
wind was again becoming light, the courses were drawn up, and all
reduced their sails.

"Stand by with the grappling irons," cried Barton, whose bright
armour and conspicuous figure made him the mark of many a missile;
and in obedience to his order a number of bold fellows leaped into
the chain-plates to threw them on board the foe, the moment the
vessels came near enough.  The sides of the English ships were
similarly supplied.  These grappling-irons were composed of five or
six branches, bent round and pointed, with a ring at the root, to
which is fastened a rope to hold on by when the grapple is thrown and
catches the object.  Thus they closed in upon each other--these six
hostile ships; the two Scots running (as our annals relate) right in
between the four English; the left centre ship being the _Harry_.
All were pouring their missiles upon each other with fearful
rapidity, and the English were so reckless that their shot must have
killed many of their own men, after piercing the Scottish hulls.  By
some mismanagement, the _Harry's_ spritsail-yard became entangled
with the main-shrouds of the _Yellow Frigate_, which forged a little
a-head, and dragging round the _Harry_ with her, by one broadside she
swept her deck like a tempest, and breached to ruin the towering poop
beyond.

"Half-an-hour of a true parabolic speculum were worth a year of this
work!" said Father Zuill, who now appeared in a coat of mail, with a
poleaxe which he handled as well as ever he had done his rosary.

"Boarders, away fore and aft!" cried Sir Andrew Wood, through his
trumpet, as he stood above the clouds of smoke at the edge of the
poop, towering like an iron statue, while the chain-plates crashed as
the ponderous hulls sheered alongside of each other in rasping
collision; and in hundreds the boarders swarmed on the bulwarks,
while the English grappling-irons clutched the Scottish ships, whose
sailors worked side by side with the foe, in lashing the shrouds
together below and the yard-arms aloft, until the six vessels formed,
as it were, one broad platform, for a scene of melancholy butchery,
which we have but little heart and less taste for describing.

The Scottish mariners, armed with their two-handed swords and Jedwood
axes, and all accoutred in steel caps and jacks or doublets of
escaupill, led by Sir Andrew Wood on one side, poured from the bows
and sprit-sail yard of the _Yellow Frigate_ upon the decks of the
_Harry_, and drove the enemy across the forecastle and along the
larboard gangway, while Barton, sheathed in full armour and wielding
a deadly ghisarma in both hands, led another band through the fire,
smoke, and infernal uproar, hewing a passage, hilt to hilt, to the
forecastle of the other ship, desperately forcing a passage through a
hedge of gallant billmen, into the waist.

The crew of the _Queen Margaret_, under Sir Alexander Mathieson,
after succeeding in repelling the English boarders, were similarly
employed elsewhere; and there, under that placid summer moon, were
Englishmen and Scot fighting like tigers, all mingled in a wild
_melée_, while their firmly-grappled ships were committed to the
mercy of the waves and currents.  Save the flash and boom of a cannon
or saker from the poops, or the bang of a pistolette or arquebuse
from the tops, there were no other sounds heard now, but the rasp of
steel gleaming on steel, the twang of the English bows, and the crash
of the Scottish axes oh helmets and bills; the cries and shrieks of
the wounded, and the yells of pain and defiance, drowned in a gurgle,
as many a man was driven, fighting, overboard, and drowned or crushed
to death between the grappled ships.  The decks were encumbered by
killed and wounded, and repeatedly the Scots were driven back over
their own bulwarks, and had to fight the English on the decks of Wood
and Mathieson.

"St Andrew!  St. Andrew!  A Wood! a Wood!" on one side, were met by
"St. George for England!" on the other, mingled with many a furious
epithet and ferocious expression of that deep-rooted national
animosity, which the infamous wars of the Plantagenets had created
between two nations, who, if allied, might then--as they have
since--defied the world in arms.

Overhead the arquebussiers blazed at each other from the tops, and
sent an occasional bullet into the mass of combatants below.

After various turns of the conflict, Robert Barton found himself
fighting hand to hand with the crew of the _Harry_, close to her
poop, and attended only by Willie Wad and a few seamen.  With these
he strove to join the Admiral, who had already penetrated into the
vessel _beyond_, and was maintaining a desperate and most unequal
conflict with her crew.

While Barton fought his way up the starboard side of the _Harry's_
deck, his boatswain, with a band of Jedwood axes, hewed a passage
along the larboard, and, owing to the heavier weapons, and perhaps
greater number of the Scots, the _Harry's_ crew were driven into the
poop, where they hewed and shot in the dark: thus many a brave man
perished by the hands of his own shipmates.  Here Barton, when just
at the poop door, encountered a gallant English gentleman, who had
repeatedly cut a passage through the frigate's men, by knocking them
down like ninepins; and, recognising Howard by the heraldic
cognizance on his surcoat, the Scottish captain uttered a cry of
triumph, and rushed upon him, to revenge Lord Howard's recent victory
in the Downs; and then forgetting all but their personal animosity,
they engaged hand to hand with sword and dagger, at every blow and
cut making the sparks fly from their coats of tempered steel; and
thrice during the conflict old Anthony Arblaster wound up his weapon,
and sent a deliberate shot at Barton's head, and was preparing a
fourth when a blow from an axe ended the poor man's shooting for ever.

"Haloo, auld junk," cried his slayer, "may I drink bilge, but thou'rt
fitted for foreign parts at last! and by St. Andrew, gaffer
Englishman," he added, turning upon Howard, "I'll cloure thy harnpan
too, double caulked wi' wadding and sheathed wi' steel though it be!"

The short squat gunner was rushing on with uplifted axe, when Barton
threw himself forward, and on his own sword caught the descending
blow.

"Sheer off, Wad, sheer off, this man is mine, and I must slay him
myself, were it but to soothe my slaughtered father's soul; so leave
us, I command you!"

Wad soon found another antagonist in tall Dick Selby, who gave him
more than enough to do.  Meanwhile the combat continued between
Howard and Barton, till a passing bullet broke the sword of the
latter, and he stood disarmed and at the mercy of Howard, who merely
uttered a bitter laugh and scornfully dropped the point of his sword,
saying,--

"How now, my bonny Scot; wilt beg thy life at an English hand?"

"I could beg it of none more noble than Howard's; but strike, if you
will, for never will I beg life or quarter of a living man, and least
of all from the brother of him who slew my father!" cried Barton,
hoarsely.

At that moment Wad returned with an armed tide of seamen flushed with
blood and victory; the noble Howard was beaten to the deck, and,
despite all Barton's efforts, would have been slain, had not the cry
of a woman been heard, and Margaret Drummond, fearless of the
surrounding carnage, the whistling shafts, the ferocious visages, and
uplifted steel, threw herself on her knees beside him, and spread her
white arms over him in protection.

The terror she had experienced in the cockpit was so great, that,
regardless of the hideous grating and crashing below and the awful
tumult above, she resolved to make an effort to reach the Scottish
ships, which, as little Will Selby had informed her, were lashed
alongside.  Thus had she come so opportunely--and thus, with these
two acts of mercy, will we gladly veil the horrors of this midnight
conflict.

The Scottish seamen, who knew her not, and deemed she was the wife of
Howard, drew back and spared him at once; for none are more merciful,
albeit their roughness, than those honest souls who live by salt
water; but Barton was confounded, and gazed upon her in astonishment
and silence, while the din of battle died away around them, and it
became known that the English ships had hauled down their colours.
So thanks to the bravery of Sir Andrew Wood, old Sir Alexander
Mathieson, "the King of the Sea," David Falconer, and a certain
valiant mariner of Leith, named William Merrimonth, sailing master of
the _Margaret_, who received a desperate wound, "ye foure Inglish
shippes were takin," and all their crews disarmed, according to the
records of the Scottish Admiralty, after a deadlier conflict than
these waters had witnessed since the Knight of Dalhousie fought King
Edward's fleet at Tweedmouth and sunk eighteen of his galleys.




CHAPTER XLIV.

LARGO.

  "Oh, blythely shines the bonnie sun upon the Isle o' May,
  And blythely rolls the morning tide into St. Andrew's Bay;
  When haddocks leave the Firth of Forth and mussels leave the shore
  When oysters climb up Berwick Law, we'll go to sea no more--
                      No more--we'll go to sea no more."
                                      _Scottish Fisherman's Song._


When the sun rose from the ocean, the appearance of these six ships
was wofully changed.  The waves were rolling in brilliant green and
gold, and the yellow sands of Tyningham, the red towers, the deep
caverns and surf-beaten rocks of Dunbar were glistening in the
morning beams; the gannets, the cormorants, and gigantic solan geese
on their snow-white pinions, were wheeling merrily in the welkin
above the summer sea; but the state of the hostile ships, which,
while they were all lashed together, had drifted hither and thither
at the mercy of the wind and tide, was deplorable.  Their decks were
crowded by killed and wounded, especially round the scuttle-butts, to
which many had crawled for the purpose of allaying their burning
thirst; the bulwarks were splashed with blood, and it oozed, or
dropped in curdles from the scuppers; boats, booms, and spars were
riven and splintered; sheets and tackles were streaming loose upon
the breeze; the yards were out of trim and lowered upon the caps,
while the canvas was pierced and torn;--but still the _blue ensign_
was flying over all.

The ships with which Sir Alexander Mathieson had grappled were almost
complete wrecks, for all his cannon were great carthouns or
forty-pounders--prodigious guns for that age.  The _Yellow Frigate_,
like her chief adversary the _Harry_, had lost all her trim neatness;
some of her yards were shot in the slings; her rigging hung in loops
and bights, and blood was trickling down the masts and stays, or
dropping from the tops upon the battered deck and white courses; for
many of Falconer's arquebussiers lay there slain, or bleeding through
the gratings, from the wounds of bullets and arrows.

Sir Andrew Wood, before loosening a buckle of his harness, now
ordered the prisoners to be secured, and crews put on board the
prizes; their damages to be partly repaired, and sail to be made on
them all.  The grappling-irons were cast off; the ports lowered; the
decks swabbed, and the dead sent ashore; shot-holes were plugged and
caulked; loose ropes coiled up, the sails trimmed, and before a
favourable breeze from the south-east, the six vessels bore away for
Largo Bay, as the Admiral had no intention of taking his prizes into
Leith, until he knew to whom they should be delivered; for he
considered the victorious barons as no better than rebels.

The dead were buried in two trenches in the cemetery of the old
collegiate kirk at Dunbar, where the mound which covered the
"Englishmen's grave" was long an object of interest to the people.

In getting the ships clear of the horrid _débris_ of the battle, and
in attending to the wounded, English and Scots worked side by side
with hearty goodwill, and only relaxed their sailor-like indifference
when they drank their cans of brown ale together, and passed the
blackjack of whiskey-and-water from man to man;--for now, when that
deadly strife was over and their fury had expended itself, enmity was
at an end--for a time at least,--and Willie Wad and Dick Selby, the
rival gunners, carved at the same junk with their jocktelegs (or
clasp-knives), and the latter sang when the former produced his
fiddle; while the boatswain spun some of his wonderful yarns to amuse
the prisoners.  All on the gundeck of the _Yellow Frigate_ seemed
merry enough, the maimed excepted, but there were lowering brows and
heavy hearts in the cabin of her Admiral.

This apartment had four windows which overlooked a gallery; and the
morning sun shone brightly through them as he rose from the
amber-coloured sea.  Along the sides were the culverins on their
carriages, and on the rudder-case were the arms of Wood--_argent_, an
oak tree growing out of a mount, with two bears for supporters; and
to this two ships were afterwards added, as we find in Sir David
Lindesay's "Book of Blazons," in memory of his victory near the Isle
of May.

The frank Laird of Largo had doffed his helmet and much of his iron
panoply, and at two bells (nine A.M.) was entertaining to a sumptuous
breakfast (as sumptuous at least as could be prepared on board of
ship) his officers and some of the English prisoners--Captain Howard,
John o'Lynne, Miles Furnival, and two other English captains whose
names are not recorded, with Falconer, Burton, and other gentlemen of
the Scottish ships.  All sat side by side at Largo's long and
hospitable board, the place of honour being assigned to Lady Margaret
Drummond and her two attendants, Rose and Cicely.

The three looked pale, jaded, and weary, for the terrors of the past
night and the horrors of the dawn had impressed them deeply--the more
so, as they had been attending to some of the wounded, who had no
other leeches than the ship's barber-apothecary and their messmates.
The breakfast consisted of several joints of mutton, cut in collops,
with roasted capons, dishes of roasted chickens, eggs broiled in
their shells on large platters--or as they are named in Scotland and
France, assiettes,--cakes, manchets, and jugs of ale, with several
sack possets, each formed of twelve eggs put into a Scottish mutchkin
of sack with a quart of cream, well sugared and boiled together for
fifteen minutes; and there were hippocrass of milk and cherry wine
for the ladies.  Such was the repast to which fair justice was done
by all save Howard and Margaret Drummond--or as we should perhaps
style her, the Duchess of Rothesay.

Entreaty and remonstrance had proved alike futile when Howard was
pressed by Barton and Sir Andrew Wood to explain how and why this
missing daughter of the Lord Drummond--she whose strange
disappearance was one of the secret springs that rolled a civil war
against the throne--was found on board his vessel!  He flatly and
firmly declined to answer; and Margaret herself could not very
clearly inform them as to her abductors; for she knew of none save
Borthwick, against whom, for want of a better object, Barton resolved
to turn the whole current of his wrath.

However, all King Henry's plot with the Scottish traitors was nearly
being discovered about the time the ships surrendered, by Master
Quentin Kraft, the notary, who was dragged abaft the mizenmast of the
_Yellow Frigate_ by Cuddie Clewline and Dalquhat the seaman, who had
found him ensconced in the cable-tier of the _Harry_, where he had
repeatedly offered them a certain iron-bound volume, with which they
would have nothing to do, believing by its aspect that it must be a
book of magic, else wherefore that lock and all these bands of steel.

"Slue him round--heave ahead, master," said the coxswain, giving him
a push; "haud up your face, auld dog-fish--you are before the
Admiral!"

The dapper attorney, in his black cassock-coat, looked very much
scared, and said in a quavering voice--

"I crave your mercy, Sir Andrew Wood--I can pay a small ransom if it
be wished; I am Quentin Kraft, a gentleman of the law--an attorney--a
notary, if it please you--one well known about Westminster Hall and
Lincoln's Inn--London."

"A what, sayst thou?" demanded the Admiral.

"A notary public, at your service--and secretary to the noble Captain
Howard."

"A scurvy rogue, Sir Andrew Wood," said Howard, disdainfully; "one
who hath been stripped of his gown and coif in Westminster Hall and
cast adrift by the benchers at Lincoln's Inn.  But men who can handle
the quill are scarce,--so I was e'en forced to content me with such a
secretary, for lack of a better."

"It is false--I am a man of repute," said Kraft.

"Yea," said Howard; "but a devilish one, sirrah."

"And if the Scottish admiral," added the spiteful notary, "will
accept this volume at my hands, promising that my life, limbs, and
goods shall be respected, it will make his fortune."

"Wretch and villain, wouldst thou betray the secrets of King Henry?"
cried Howard, as he rushed upon Kraft, and wrenching away the volume,
flung it through an open port-hole; and being iron-bound, it sunk
like a stone into the sea.

"It was well done, Captain Howard," said Sir Andrew Wood; "I ken
little and I care less what yonder black tome contained; but I honour
thee for destroying it, as much as I despise this miserable notary
for proffering it as the price of a life that is not worth taking.
Away with him, Cuddie, and though such lubberly land-loupers are gude
for nocht but to drink the king's ale and lollop in the afterguard or
ship's waist, see that no man molests him."

The breakfast was dispatched with great relish.  Men were used to
hard knocks, cuts, and slashes in those days; and, though many at the
table had their heads and arms bandaged up, from the effect of their
late conflict, they passed the ale-cans and frothing possets merrily
from hand to hand; and already Father Zuill, who had donned his
friar's frock, was explaining to John o'Lynne the powerful results
that would ultimately accrue to an astonished world by a properly
developed parabolic speculum; and John listened with a smile of
perplexity to what he considered the freak of a learned madman.

Barton sat silent, and gazed from time to time at Howard, as if he
was pondering whether it was a dream or a reality, that they both had
their legs under the same friendly table.  Falconer, too.  was
somewhat silent, or only addressed the fair Margaret, in whose soft
eyes and pale Madonna face he was tracing the expression of her
darker sister Sybilla.  Howard was also reserved, for the waves that
ran go brightly past the cabin windows were bearing him further from
his home; and he felt himself disgraced in being captured by a force
so inferior to his own, and being the subject of a narrative that
would sound but ill on Paul's Walk, in London; and he was aware, too,
that with Margaret's release all hope of his gaining her affection
would pass away for ever for now she would be restored to that gay
young prince, whom, as yet, he conceived to be her lover only.

Wood observed that the brave Englishman was low-spirited, and that a
peculiar sadness hovered over his fine features, so he begged him to
be of good cheer; "for I doubt not," said he, "that the Governor of
Berwick will have in ward some of our mosstrooping lairds, for whom
to exchange thee; at all events, we may fairly set thee off against
the Lord Bishop of Dunblane, whom your king still detains in London.
Come, shipmate, fill the foreyard; the sea is yet under thee--and
life in thee is young yet; for I am more than twice thine age, and am
a canty auld carle yet."

"True, Admiral," said Howard, with a glance at Margaret; "but the
charms of life have been doubly destroyed at the very time I was
beginning to find there was another to live for than myself."

The Admiral rubbed his beard uneasily, for he detected the glance of
Howard, and saw how Margaret's cheek reddened, though Falconer was
speaking to her of other things; and, as he afterwards said to
Barton, he "knew in a moment which way the wind was setting in," but
he veiled his correct suspicions, and said,--

"Of course it is sad to lose one's old shipmates and a battle too;
but what o' that; we lose to-day and win to-morrow, for we cannot be
always victorious.  Twelve years ago, the ships of stout Andrew
Barton (who never was beaten before) were overwhelmed by the Admiral
of Portugal, though, as the song says, he was

  'The best sailor that ever sailed the sea.'

But, gadzooks, he soon after cleared off that score with the skippers
of the King of Portugal."

"True, Admiral," said Howard, glad to grasp at anything which might
serve to explain his melancholy; "but of all those whom you have sent
ashore to be entombed, and of those who in the _Cressi_ have sunk to
feed the hungry serpent of the sea," he continued, for that nautical
personage, now so familiar to us as Master David Jones, was then
unknown, "I regret none more than brave Anthony Arblaster, the
captain of my archers."

"Ah--and how fell he?"

"A blow from a poleaxe took him right amidships, and slew him;--poor
Tony!"

"And thus he went to foreign parts--God bless him! we'll remember him
when masses are said and the sance-bell tolled in Largo Kirk,"
replied the Admiral.  "And now, Madame," he added, turning to
Margaret, to change the subject, "now that the smiles are coming back
to your sweet face (I am an auld carle, and may say so)--now that you
have got all your gear rove and your golden hair braided, by my
faith, I would scarcely know you it be the same wild dame who rushed
from the _Harry's_ poop last night, all pale, like a white spirit or
weird woman, with your hair dishevelled and canvas loose in the
brails, to save this gallant gentleman!  I' faith! 'twill be a
strange story to tell the old Lord Drummond, though darkly enough he
looked on me, when, yesterday at noon, we stood in the prince's
presence.  I think that now I may win his good-will, unless his heart
be tough as a nine-inch cable or hard as a cannon-ball."

"You have indeed a claim on my father's everlasting gratitude--and on
one greater even than he," said Margaret, as tears filled her eyes,
and she paused, lest too many thanks should sound reproachfully to
the gentle Howard.

"Ay, the good king," said the Admiral, partly mistaking her; "yet, I
would to St. Andrew we could hear aught of him, for he must be in
Scotland still, and they are false traitors who say he hath fled to
Holland, England, or any other foreign country; for there are too
many brave clansmen in the north to make flight necessary after one
battle!  But of these matters of statecraft I ken little; kings and
lords ride in owre deep water for me; so the gunner to his lintstock
and the steersman to his helm, say I."

About noon the ships passed the basaltic promontory and low, flat,
sterile links near Elie--or as it was then named, Ardross, with the
houses of its bleak old burgh standing upon sea-dykes of black round
stones, on which the tide was roaring with a peculiar sound, which
ever betokens bad weather.  Thus, the fisher-boats were all creeping
under the lee of the bluff, into that little harbour which is still
named from our Admiral, Wood's Haven; and as the mist was beginning
to roll round the green and conical hill of Largo, he ordered that on
coming to anchor in the bay, the topmasts should be struck, the
topgallant-yards sent down on deck, and all the ports secured, for
now the sky had overcast, and as the old sea rhyme says,

  "When Largo Law the mist doth bear,
  Let Kelly Law for storms prepare."

Thus, both wind and rain were expected.

The coast of Fife looked close and gloomy, the headlands were
drenched in foam; the fir woods and deeply caverned shore of
Kilconquhar were black and dreary; the sun became fiery and red,
while the wind came in hollow, sudden, and furious gusts, an the
vessels ran into the broad and beautiful Bay of Largo, and came to
anchor abreast of the little town, which was then thriving under the
fatherly care of the noble merchant-skipper, and was protected by the
strong castle he had built with the royal permission, on becoming the
king's chief admiral, and being made a knight and baron of Parliament.

As the summer sky was darkening fast, and some of the ships were
injured in their hulls, Sir Andrew ordered all the hammocks to be
stowed below; the culverins to be double-breeched, the deadlights to
be shipped, and the sheet anchors to be let go, as the vessels had to
ride on an ebb and lee tide.  He then conveyed Lady Margaret and her
two English attendants, with Howard, Miles Furnival, and all the
gentlemen of their squadron, ashore, and conducted them to his Castle
of Largo, the gates of which were barely closed behind them, before
the summer storm burst forth with all its fury, and its drenching
rain that sowed the sea and smoked along the shore, while the chill
east wind, swayed the heavy woods and made the ships careen in the
bay, as it swept round each bare headland, and the rifted nesses of
Fife.

"Truly Horace was right," sighed Father Zuill, as he saw the squadron
straining on their cables, "when he said that 'he who ventured first
to sea had a soul of triple brass!'"




CHAPTER XLV.

ST. ANTHONY'S BELL.

  "The gruntil of St. Anthony's sow,
  Quhilk bore his holy bell."--SIR D. LINDESAY.


Next day it became known among all the ports on both sides of the
Forth, that Admiral Wood had won another victory--that his three
favourite followers, Mathieson, Barton of Leith, and Falconer of
Bo'ness, had escaped without scaith, and the bells in more than a
hundred steeples rang joyously, while the ships hoisted all their
colours and streamers in the roadstead, at the Hope, and in the
harbours.

In the house of Barton, the insurgent nobles held a deep carouse, and
drank the Rhenish and Malvoisie of the umquhile Sir Andrew with a
relish all the greater that it cost them nothing.  Among the company
were four persons, at least, who would rather have hailed a
disastrous defeat than this unexpected victory.

These were the Lords Home and Hailes--who had great hopes that their
troublesome rivals might have been sent to a better world; but
chiefly Sir Patrick Gray and Sir James Shaw, with others of their
servile and infamous faction, who were thunderstruck by the
intelligence; for they had never doubted, when the Admiral dropped
down the river with two vessels only, that he was running into the
jaws of destruction.  But it is strange that Wood, in all his naval
battles, had to contend against great odds, yet never _once_ was
beaten.  And now the cosmopolitans of the English faction trembled,
as they remembered their bond with Henry, and feared that unless the
lips of Margaret Drummond were sealed for ever, their projects would
all be revealed to Rothesay, of whom, boy as he was, they knew enough
to be assured of a terrible retribution.

Lord Drummond--that irascible old patrician--had peremptorily warned
his daughters Euphemia and Sybilla to prepare for being espoused by
Home and Hailes, whose new patents of nobility, he believed, would be
issued as soon as the king's _flight_--his murder was yet
unknown--was ascertained, and as soon as Rothesay was proclaimed
king.  Their uncle, the Dean of Dunblane--a facile priest, in all
things subservient to his brother as chief of the clan Drummond, and,
like most Scottish churchmen of that age, bent solely on the
aggrandizement of his family,--was to perform the ceremony, which was
fixed to take place on an early day.  And as the venerable dean had
long since been abstracted from all human sympathies, and become a
mere mummy in a cassock and scapular, the poor girls had now no hope
in anything, and no resource but their tears, which were likely to
avail them little; for in Scotland, in those days, the rights of
women were as little known, or nearly as ill defined, as among the
Asiatics in the present; for cruel coercion and abduction at the
sword's point were of daily occurrence, as the criminal records show,
until the middle of the last century.

The presence of the prince's court and insurgent army was a harvest
to the keeper of the tavern or hostel, already referred to, as being
situated in the Kirkgate--_the Bell_,--so named in honour of the
hospitallers of the ancient and wealthy preceptory of St. Anthony,
whose establishment stood on the east side of that venerable
thoroughfare, and who wore a _bell_, sewn in blue cloth on the breast
of their gowns.  This signboard gave the said tavern respectability,
while the keeper was ensured protection by paying an exorbitant
yearly fee to the Laird of Restalrig for the privilege of keeping it
open; for that turbulent and avaricious little potentate was lord
superior of Leith; and though King Robert I. had granted the harbour
to the citizens of Edinburgh, they had still to purchase from the
family of Logan the right of erecting wharves and houses upon the
sandy banks of the river, which for ages had flowed into the Forth
between heaps of sand and knolls of whin and broom.

On the second day after the naval battle, about six o'clock, when the
great bell of St. Anthony had rung the hospitallers to prayer, in an
upper chamber of the hostel (the east windows of which overlooked the
drear expanse of the sandy links and the Figgate-muir, on the verge
of which the waves were rippling) sat Sir James Shaw of Sauchie, Sir
Patrick Gray, and their brother assassin, Sir William Stirling of
Keir, all armed as we saw them last at Beaton's mill, save their
helmets, which, with their scarfs, swords, and wheel-locks, lay on a
bench, which stood on one side of the wainscoted room.  On the
mantelpiece were shells, stuffed fishes, and sea eggs.  There was no
fire on the hearth, of course, for the month of June; and the recess
was destitute of a grate, for such things were expensive.  The
furniture consisted of a large table, and fauld-stools seated with
leather.  Comfort was considered unnecessary in an hostel,
consequently the room looked bare and dreary, and the governor of his
majesty's Castle of Stirling was, as usual, a little tipsy; for after
their early supper of fried flounders, buttered crabs, and eggs in
gravy, each had imbibed more than a Scotch pint (equal to an English
quart) of Rochelle wine, then sold at eight-pence; and a fresh supply
was ordered, for they had thirst and doubt, spleen and, it might be,
some small remorse to drown.  And the pewter stoups of the last
supply had just been placed upon the black oak table, when Hew
Borthwick, in his rich attire, stood before them, and carefully
locked the door on the inside.

"By my soul, sir, but you are bravely apparelled!" said the grim
Baron of Sauchie, with a drunken leer.  "What sayeth the Act of
'71:--that none wear silk except knights, minstrels, and heralds--"

"King James and his acts--"

"Are lying together in a slough ditch," said the Laird of Keir
interrupting the pale and sneering Borthwick.  "But we have other
matter in hand; you have just come from the east country?"

"I left Dunbar this day, at morn."

"Be seated.  Here, take a stoup of the Rochelle.  Well, is not this
accursed intelligence?" said Gray, grinding his teeth.  "What!
Howard, with five great ships, to be beaten by this old seahorse of
Largo, this presumptuous Leither, with only two!--and Kraft, that
damnable secretary, he may ruin us all!"

"Think of three Scottish barons being at the mercy of an English
notary!" said Borthwick, scanning them maliciously over his wine-pot,
as it rose to the angle of forty-five degrees above his mouth.

"And his book--and the bond in cypher," added Gray.

"God confound this evil fortune!" growled Sir James Shaw.  "To be at
the beck of a smockfaced driveller!  The thing is not to be borne,
sirs; we must stop his mouth, by fair means or by foul."

"Art certain, Hew, these rumours of victory are not exaggerated?"

"There remains not the shadow of a doubt.  With hundreds more--yea
thousands--in East Lothian, I saw at dawn yesterday but two flags
flying, as the six ships stood under sail for Fife, And these were
the blue ensigns, with the white cross of Saint Andrew."

"We must sleep in our harness, and keep fleet horses saddled day and
night," said Gray; "and let spies be set to watch what messages come
hither from the admiral."

"Angus may see us clear of it," suggested Keir.

"Angus knows nothing of our deeper plots," said the more politic and
subtle Gray: "moreover, he abhors an English match as much as we
pretend to hate a continental one--"

"Among ourselves."

"Of course.  He cares not for rank--he is an earl; he cares not for
pay--he is Lord of Galloway, and owns more land and lances than any
four earls in Scotland."

"He is well off!  I'faith, I have been spending four thousand pounds
yearly, out of a barony that yields birt one thousand Scottish crowns
per year," said Shaw.

"Henry of England will deem us fools for having our plots marred, and
in revenge may tell the whole to Rothesay, and then we shall all be
lost men."

"Well, well," said Shaw, draining his huge tankard; "after all his
gold spent and ships lost, it must be rather provoking to find that
James III. is only removed to make little Maggie Drummond Queen of
Scotland."

"I urged Howard to throw her overboard," said Borthwick, lowering his
voice, while that snaky gleam which his eyes often wore passed over
them.

"And what said Howard then?" asked Gray, impatiently.

"The Saxon pockpudding! he smote me on the mouth with his steel
glove, and styled your knighthoods a pack of 'Scottish hounds,'"
replied Borthwick, whose sinister brow grew dark with ferocity; "and
he threatened to make a martyr of me, like St. Clement."

"Would to thy master the devil that he had done so," grumbled the
drunken Shaw; thinking of his share in that dark deed in Beaton's
mill.

Gray muttered an impatient and unmeaning malediction.

"What said ye then?" asked Keir, with a cold smile, as he played with
his dagger.

"I said little, but I thought much."

"What thought ye?" asked Gray, fiercely.

"Merely that this Englishman was not yet on his own side of the
border," said Borthwick with a deep smile, as he took the last drain
of his wine-pot.

"Angus still acts the bearward to this beardless princeling
Rothesay," said Gray; "and so is occupied by matters of his own; but
the tide of events on which we have ridden so bravely, seems setting
in against us now; all we can do is to watch, and watch well; let us
be assured in the first place, of what messengers come from the
fleet, and whether they say aught of Margaret Drummond; for if she
once gain Rothesay's ear, our cause is ruined and for ever lost!"

Borthwick bit his tongue with anger, for he trembled for himself
alone.

"Get thee spies," said Keir; "and let Barton's house, where Rothesay
lodges, be watched both day and night.  Watch all who come from
thence, and from the Laird of Largo."

"But spies must be paid, Sir William, and I am short of money."

"Already!" cried Gray; "curse thee, fellow; dost think we keep a coin
house?  Short again, after all received from Howard, from Henry VII.,
and from us?"

"All gone, sirs," he added, doggedly; "patriotism is expensive work."

"Here are eight fleurs-de-lys, and not another coin shalt thou have,
were it for thy mass when _in articulo mortis_.  So away to thy task,
while we will watch and deliberate."

The worthy functionary of the English faction swept the Laird of
Keir's money into the velvet pouch which hung on his right hip beside
his poniard, and then quitted the presence of his employers.  As he
descended the stair of the hostel, a gentleman in black armour
touched him roughly on the shoulder.  Borthwick grew pale, and
clutched the dagger at his girdle; and then perceiving that the iron
plates of this personage were somewhat rusty, he said with haughty
insolence,--

"Who may you be?"

"Your better man, sirrah--therefore attend."

"What want ye, sir?" he asked, rather abashed by the other's air and
determined manner.

"Nothing," was the blunt reply; "that is, personally I seek nothing
of such fellows as thee; but the right honourable my very good lord
and chief requires your presence in his chamber, here, without delay."

Borthwick still kept a hand upon his poniard, as he scanned the
speaker's sunburned face.

"And who are you?" he asked, after a pause.

"One of the Hepburns--Adam of the Black Castle."

"Then your chief is the Lord Hailes?"

"I have just had the honour of hinting as much," replied the other,
with an irony which Borthwick dared not resent.

"Lead on, then, laird; I follow you," he said; and then they ascended
another of the turnpike stairs with which this hostel was furnished.




CHAPTER XLVI.

THE GUNNER.

  "They sin who tell us Love can die;
  With life all other passions fly,
  All others are but nonity."--_Southey._


At this time, when the sun had set enveloped in clouds--when the
Forth was breaking in foam over the black scalp of the Beacon Rock,
and while its billows boomed along the dreary ridges of the
Mussel-cape and the far expanse of desert-sand that bordered the
Figgate-muir,--Euphemia and Sybilla Drummond occupied a seat near the
beach at Barton's house, where they sat hand-in-hand, and bathed in
tears; for their sky, to speak figuratively, was as much overcast as
that which yester-night had warned old Andrew Wood to drop his
anchors and make all snug for riding out a gale in the bonny Bay of
Largo.  But it was not the sullen chafing of the waves, the darkening
of the inky sky, the foam-flecked river, or the flying scud, that
brought those tears to the hazel eyes of these two gentle and loving
sisters, for they feared not for the safety of their lovers; they
wept alone for that unhappy fate to which they seemed abandoned; for
ambition or avarice had steeled the heart of their father against
them; and family pride and priestly austerity had withered up the
soul of their uncle; and hope they had none.

Callous, proud, and cold, Hailes and Home seemed bent on espousing
them in a spirit of mere opposition or convenience--if not with
something of revenge, for their rejection of an absurd and insulting
suit which had been coarsely pressed upon them, while it was known
that their affections were secured by others, and that their hearts
were swollen with sorrow by the strange disappearance of their
sister; and young Rothesay, who for her sake loved them well, and who
might have unravelled one part of her story--viz., the discovery of
the poor little babe in the alcove, was yet, by the lawless detention
of the Bishop of Dunblane in England, obliged to seal his lips as to
an espousal which he dared not acknowledge to the nation.

Two large willows shaded, and a thick boor-tree hedge screened this
old garden seat, on which a hundred lovers had cut their names or
initials; and on the soft rind of the wallows, Sybilla soon
discovered the date 1486, between the letters D.F. and S.D.--the
initials of herself and Falconer, who, in that year had first seen
and learned to love her, and, like a true Orlando, had cut them
there,--thus revealing, as it were, to the spirits of the air and the
sea, that love which he dared hardly acknowledge to himself as yet.

"Poor dear Falconer!" said Sybilla, patting the rind with her pretty
white hand; "thou lovest me well and truly!"

Since their separation at Dundee, she had never heard his voice; nor
since that horrible day had Euphemia an opportunity of addressing
Barton, her betrothed, save for one brief moment, the other evening,
when with the admiral he left that house of which the prince and
nobles had unlawfully possessed themselves; so both the poor girls
were very sad and miserable, and the communings of each served but to
feed rather than soothe the sorrow of the other.

Euphemia, who, as the eldest, had learned to act with more decision
than her sister, had written and had now concealed in her bosom a
letter for Robert Barton, relating to him the desperate crisis that
was coming; and boldly saying, that unless he and Falconer rescued
and concealed them from Hailes and Home, they would be compelled to
bend before the overweening influence of their father, especially if
united to the preaching and stern presence of their uncle, the Dean,
of whose arrival from the cathedral city of Dunblane they were hourly
in terror.

"It is here, you see, sister Sybie," said Lady Euphemia, opening two
little pearl buttons of her boddice, and discovering the corner of a
square epistle, tied with blue ribbons; "but how we are to get it
conveyed to Robert's hand, I know not--for of all the hundreds about
us, is there one we can trust?  They are all Hepburns devoted to
Hailes, Homes devoted to Home, or Drummonds who tremble at our
father's name."

"There is young Mewie, or Balloch," said Sybilla; "both smile in the
silliest way, and blush from their bonnets to their red beards, when
I address them.  What think you, Effie, of trying them?"

"I think it would be most unwise.  Two cock-lairds, who are good for
nothing but hunting the deer and hewing down the clan Donnoquhy, or
any other tribe on whom our father unkennels them and their
followers, like a pack of hungry hounds;--men who drink all day and
sleep all night in their plaids under the hall tables, or anywhere
else, like gillies or trencherman.  You will find a hundred men as
good in our father's band, yet there is not one I dare entrust with
_this_!"

"Would not some old Franciscan or Hospitaller convey it, as an act of
mercy?" said Sybilla, weeping bitterly.

"They dare not, sister, for the terror of our father's name is great;
and through the dean, his wrath might reach even them," said Euphemia.

"And in three days at furthest, this terrible dean will be here, with
his stern brow and cunning cold grey eye.  Oh!  Effie, would not the
young prince find us a messenger?"

"Nay, he has not a friend himself on whom he can rely.  Young
Lindesay, his dearest gossip and companion, fought against him in the
king's ranks; and moreover, Rothesay seems as crushed in heart and
broken in spirit as ourselves, for strange whispers are abroad anent
our poor king's life and some old prophecy; and these rumours sorely
wound the prince's happiness and honour."

"I believe thee, sister.  Then hedged in, watched, begirt, and
attended as we are, how can we communicate?" asked Sybilla; "Heaven
only knows!" she added, lowering her head on her sister's breast, and
giving way to tears again: "Poor David Falconer--so sad, so gentle!
so full of kind and affectionate thoughts!--perhaps I shall never see
him more!"

"Come, sister Sybie," said Euphemia, "take an example from me.  Do I
weep like a child, as little Beatrix would do?  No, no; I gather
courage as the storm darkens.  Barton----"

"Barton is rich; he possesses this lordly house and that noble barony
on the Almond.  He is very rich, dear Effie, so I do not pity him as
I do David Falconer, who is poor, and hath nothing but what his sword
wins."

"And, Heaven knows, it would win him more in any land than here in
Scotland; for there are over many false traitors and hypocrites,
envious detractors and jealous lords among us, for truth, honour, or
patriotism to be justly appreciated; and so will it ever be."

"I long so much once more to speak with David!" said Sybilla; "to lay
my cheek where it has never lain--on his kind breast, and tell
him--tell him all the horror we endured, dear sister, on that last
awful day at Dundee."

"True," said Euphemia, as her hazel eyes flashed fire, and she shook
the pearl pendants in her velvet cap; "and that day of crime broke
all truce for ever between our father's friends and us; and so, this
letter----"

"Would it were away--or that I were a pigeon, and could fly with it
under my wing."

"If I could meet the poor poet Dunbar,--you remember William Dunbar,
who sent us the staff of sweet verses--the kind young Franciscan?--I
think we might trust him safely."

"A poor fisherman, rather!" said Sybilla; "he comes from Lord Hailes'
country, and yet hath fled to England in dread of the nobles."

The sisters relapsed into silence for a time, and sat observing a
brown fisher-boat, which, with its dark chocolate-coloured lug-sail
set, was running swiftly towards the old harbour, with its sharp prow
dashing the dingy water of the river in white spray on both sides,
till it was almost abreast of the west bank of the Leith, _i.e._,
between the old wooden pier and the sandy promontory occupied by the
garden and mansion of Robert Barton.  Then one of two men who were in
her shortened sail, while the other, (who was none else but our
former friend Jamie Gair) put the tiller hard up, and brought the
little vessel sheering close by where the sisters were seated.

The person who had taken in the sail was a short, thickset man, clad
in a rough grey gaberdine, girt with a belt at which hung a pouch and
poniard; on his head was a blue bonnet; round his neck was a steel
gorget, and his legs were encased in long boots which had never been
blackened, and seldom oiled.  He now sprang ashore by wading through
the rippling surf, which came nearly up to his knees, and advanced
straight towards the sisters, who, by his attire, knew him to be a
seaman of the _Yellow Frigate_.  He approached with diffidence, and,
removing his bonnet from his round and well-thatched head as he
bowed, made one of those scrapes with the right foot which we suppose
have been peculiar to all seamen since the ark first got under way.

"Weel, may I drink bilge, ladies, but I have gude luck to-day," said
he.

"I hope you may have it every day, sir," said Lady Euphemia.  "I
suppose you are----"

"Wad--madam; Willie Wad, gunner to the Laird of Largo."

Sybilla held her breath as she listened to him!

"It came on foul weather after our tulzie with the Englishmen off
Dunbar, and so we ran owre to Largo Bay, where the squadron rides wi'
head to wind and topgallant yards on deck; while the admiral, and a'
our gallant gentlemen--English as weel as Scots--are safely moored in
Largo House; but as soon as I could leave the ship, the gude Captain
Barton and Sir David Falconer sent me across the Firth in Jamie
Gair's boat, wi' some sma' bits o' remembrances to you ladies, and to
let ye be assured that they are baith sound and tight, and had never
a plank started or spar knocked awa', though shot and shaft the other
night flew about us thick as hail in February."

"And so they are safe!" said the impulsive Euphemia, taking a silver
chain from her neck, and throwing it over the head of the gunner.

"Gentle madam," said the sailor, with another scrape of the right
foot; "I couldna' decline the honour you do me--I would rather drink
bilge! but what is a puir fellow like me to do wi' a gaud sae braw as
this?"

"You have some bonnie lass who loves you, I doubt not."

"I have had many, but they aye parted their cables and got adrift
someway or other; yet there is a braw bonnie craft at Largo that may
yet come under my lee," replied Wad, who had grown tender with
English Rose; "but the Captain gied me a silver pound to pay expenses
though his shipmate.  I hae here a packet addressed to you, Lady
Euphemia, and another for the Lady Sybilla; I ne'er kent murkle o'
crocans and crooks, being better leaved in the weight o' shot, the
charges o' powder, wi knotting and splicing; so I desired that the
big packet from Captain Barton should be for the tallest lady, and
the next, from the captain of our arquebusses, for you, Lady Sybilla."

"How fortunate that we were here! watched as we are, you could never
have reached us."

"They have braw news, ladies, to tell you," said Willie, gathering
courage as he spoke, and ceasing to twirl his bonnet, or shift from
foot to foot; "for what think ye?  We found your fair sister, the
Lady Margaret, a prisoner on board the English _Harry_."

Astonishment and joy fettered the tongues of the sisters at this
intelligence.

"Ay, ladies; and noo she is wi' the admiral in Largo Tower, and I
would ye were moored in as safe riding; for by what the captain told
me, there are owre many gilded sharks and perfumed pirates hovering
about ye here; and by my father's grave, I see twa coming this way
noo!"

The sisters did not hear this exclamation, or did not understand it,
for they were weeping and joyfully embracing each other, being highly
excited by the intelligence which the short squat gunner imparted to
them with the most perfect stolidity; and while they addressed each
other, he continued to smooth his thick shock hair, and gaze with
suspicion upon two richly-attired gentlemen, who were in half armour,
and who loitered near the back porch of the house, where they were
closely observing him; for they were no other than the two lords,
Hailes and Home.

Those who are in the habit of plotting and deceiving, usually suspect
others of doing the same.  Thus, the moment these noble suitors (who
had come to visit the sisters) perceived Euphemia and Sybilla
conversing with an armed seaman, they paused to watch for what might
follow, as they had no doubt he belonged to one of the admiral's
ships.

To the eager questions of "How--why--and wherefore their sister
Margaret came to be an English captive?" Wad replied, again and
again,--

"I ken nae mair, ladies, than the man in the mune; and neither do the
admiral nor Robert Barton; for the English captains, who alone may
ken, are vowed to silence.  We opine there has been dark treachery at
work, but why or how is owre deep for us to fathom; but noo I maun
e'en be sheering off, for two armed gallants are heaving in sight,
and Barton warned me that this was dangerous ground.  These are the
letters, whilk will gie a' necessary account of our battle; and lest
ye have na time to read and answer them--for I must cut my cable and
run--just say, madam, where it will please you to meet the captain
and Sir David, who hae muckle to say that none but you maun hear?"

"Oh, we cannot have more to hear than we have to say and ask!" said
Euphemia, who had already made herself mistress of Barton's loving
epistle, while Sybilla was bending her streaming eyes over
Falconer's, who had sent her a handsome gold cross which he had found
in one of the captured ships; while Barton had enclosed a book--then
a priceless gift--which he had found in the _Harry_.

"Is the admiral coming over to Leith?" they asked.

"No; his hard-won prizes will he yield to none but to the king; and
the king is not here."

"I have a letter ready written for Barton, and in a moment will add
where we can meet him; but my poor brain is a chaos now," said
Euphemia.  "Where shall we say, sister--St. Magdalen's Chapel?"

"On the Figgate-muir--it is so lonely."

"And on what pretence can we visit it?"

"A pilgrimage to pray," said Sybilla.

"People do not believe in pilgrimages now.  Hailes would laugh, and
our father would storm and refuse----"

"Then where else shall I say?" said Euphemia.

"The Rood Chapel in Leith Loan."

"Their lives would be in peril there," said Willie Wad, who still
kept his eyes fixed on the eavesdroppers, who had resolved to waylay
him as he passed through the garden, and force him at the sword's
point, to say from whence he came, or be slain.

"Say, say," urged Euphemia, bewildered, as she produced at pencil of
pointed lead.

"I know not where to say--but oh, speak lower, lest we be overheard."

"Oh, will you be wary, Willie, for we have none to trust but you?"

"I will stick to you like a burr on a bonnet," replied Wad, with
energy; "and may he that would wrong ye ne'er drink aught but bilge
in this world, and boiling water in that to come!"

"We will meet them at Loretto," said Sybilla.

"Loretto! that is beyond the Eskwater, and further off than St.
Magdalene's."

"True, sister; but it is a place of such holiness, that none will
molest us there."

"May Heaven forgive our duplicity--but what can we do without it?"
sighed Euphemia.

"We can meet them there, and pray too, sister."

"We shall go on horseback, accompanied only by women and pages.  The
place is quiet; our meeting once achieved, and arrangements made,
perhaps for a flight to our dear Maggie at Largo, we must trust to
Providence for the rest.  I am happier now, that this is decided on,"
continued Euphemia, as she wrote--'Post scriptum; we will meet you at
the Chapel of Loretto.  beside the links of Musselburgh, on Friday,
in the evening; for there we mean to spend the whole night in vigil
and in prayer.  Till then, may God and the Blessed Virgin take you
into their holy keeping.  E.D.'  "Friday will be the day after
to-morrow--may no unhappy event intervene to prevent our keeping the
tryst," she added, folding the letter, and tying the ribbons, after
which she gave it to Wad, who placed it in the tarpaulin pouch at his
girdle; and making a low obeisance, by scraping his left foot and
pulling his forelock with the right hand, retired, not by the garden,
as the two loitering lords expected, but by wading through the water,
and stepping on board of Gair's boat.  Then he and the proprietor
thereof betook themselves to the oars, and pulled into the crowded
harbour, where they were soon lost in the dusk, amid the maze of
boats, barges, crayers, and caravels, which filled it on both sides;
for, as there were then no wet-docks or stone quays, all vessels were
moored by the sides of the Leith, or in the midstream.

With one or two followers, Home hurried away by St. Nicholas Wynd to
intercept the gunner, while Hailes advanced to meet the two ladies,
who, with flushed faces and sparkling eyes, were retiring into the
house.

"I fear, madams," said the proud lord, sarcastically, "that our
appearance in the garden has interrupted your conference with a
salt-water friend."

"I knew not that your lordship was watching us," replied Euphemia.

"Did yonder tarry rascal come from the ship of our contumacious
skipper, the Laird of Largo?"

"Permit us to pass, my lord, and do not add one more insult to the
many we have received at your hands."

"I deplore that you should speak thus to me, madam; but your father
is a noble, and I cannot see his honour trifled with by fishermen and
merchant mariners, though the king may knight them, and set them to
fight and man his ships.  I pray you to pardon my curiosity--but you
gave that seaman a letter, I think."

"He gave me a packet, you mean," said Euphemia, trembling with
apprehension, as the calm, bold eye of Hailes scrutinized her
beautiful face with more of pity than indignation.

"And this packet----"

"You are very inquisitive."

"Your _betrothed_, the Lord Home, is my dear friend."

Euphemia bit her lips with anger, while her eyes filled with tears.

"And this packet?" said Hailes again.

"Contained a book--only a book found in an English ship; and your
lordship knows that a printed book is worth some crofts of corn."

"It may be so, but I would rather have the crofts," said Hailes, with
a smile of scorn, as Euphemia opened the black-letter folio.  "Thank
God, I have no need to write; for I can bite my thumb, and affix my
seal, like the good lord my father before me, to aught that is
requisite in peace, and with this--his sword--I make my mark, where
it suits me, in time of war; but what is this most precious tome?"

"One, the perusal of which might be of infinite service to your
lordship."

"Indeed!--then what may it be--read, if it please you, fair madam."

"'_The Book of Good Manners_,'" said Euphemia, with a smile, as she
read the title page, which we give literally from the original now
before us; "'_fynisshed and translated out of frensshe in to
englisshe, the viiij day of Juyne, in the yere of our Lord_, 1487,
_and the first yere of the regne of Kyng harry the vij_--compiled by
the venerable _Frere Jacques le Graunt, an Augustin_,' and the study
thereof would, I am assured, benefit you much, so God keep you, my
lord--and now, fare-you-well."

Sybilla laughed, as Euphemia gave one of her lofty bows, and they
swept past Hailes, into whose proud heart the broad taunt sank
deeply, for he had perception enough to feel his own want of manner
and of education; so he bit his nether lip as he muttered, "I shall
byde my time, and when I have either of you in my castle by the Tyne,
her tongue shall be bridled, should a brank of iron be made for it!"

Then turning on his heel, he hurried after Home to wreak his
smothered wrath on the interloping mariner.




CHAPTER XLVII.

BORTHWICK'S NEW MISSION.

                "Your pardon, sir,
  But sure this lack of Christian charity
  Looks not like Christian truth."


"I would give ten of my best horses, if by so doing I could find this
stunted vagabond in the grey gaberdine!" said Hailes to Home, as they
met in the Broad Wynd; "and so he has escaped your lordship too?"

"Yes, but we shall find him yet.  Canst think of any one to employ,
Blackcastle?" asked Home of a Hepburn who attended them.

"Nay, not I, my lords," replied Hepburn; "I am but little used to the
dirty work which seems the sole occupation of those who hover about
the court of this poor prince; and it would ill beseem a gentleman of
name to be hunting for a seaman among yonder tarry wilderness of
boats and booms, casks and anchors."

Lord Hailes frowned at his retainer.

"Lady Euphemia Drummond gave this man a letter, and this letter we
must have, should we burn Leith for it!" said Home.

"Whom shall we employ?" asked Blackcastle; "there are rascals and
pimps in plenty about the prince's court, for the news of our rising
seems to have gathered all the roguery in Scotland from the four
winds of Heaven."

His lord and chief frowned again, and said, "You are over free with
your tongue, Adam, and at this juncture I like it not.  Art thou a
king's man, eh?"

"Though a landed gentleman, I am your lordship's vassal and near
kinsman," replied the laird, evasively; "but there is a fellow named
Borthwick, a follower of Sir Patrick Gray of Kyneff, who is the best
man to assist you in this matter, I think."

"And where may he be found?" asked Home.

"At the _Tantony Bell_ in the Kirkgate."

"Let us seek him.  Get us a room, Blackcastle, and see if this fellow
be about the tavern."

Thus it was that _Sir_ Hew was accosted in the stair by the haughty
lesser baron, who despised both him and his lord for the plots they
had in hand; and thus it was that the avaricious regicide found
himself ushered suddenly into the presence of the two greatest
military chiefs in the South Lowlands; for Hailes was a warden of the
Marches, and Home was steward of Dunbar.

The landlord in person brought them a supply of wine in a large Delft
jug, with four silver-rimmed stoups of horn.  The chamber was
wainscoted, and its windows faced, on one side, the quaint and narrow
Kirkgate, which became gloomy as the dusk deepened, and on the other,
overlooked a narrow pathway called the Cotefield-loan.

"Fill thy stoup, my friend--'tis East-sea wine, this," said the Laird
of Blackcastle to Borthwick, who, he rightly conjectured, would be
more likely to do his lord's behest if his heart were first warmed by
wine.

"Thou art a gaily-dressed carle, on my faith!" said Hailes, who had
not recovered his temper since Lady Euphemia's ill-disguised contempt
had ruffled it, and he lacked an object on which to vent his spleen.
"Scarlet cloth and seed-pearls, velvet and passments," he continued,
coolly surveying the gay attire of Borthwick; "though I have two
thousand mailed horse in my train, and twice that number of spearmen
on foot, I doubt mickle whether I can afford to win the service of a
gallant so dainty!"

"Tush!" said Lord Home, more warily; "why should not an honest man
dress him as he pleases?"

"Well, sirs," said the plain Laird of Blackcastle, "to cross the
Lammermuirs, or ride through the Merse, I would rather have my steel
cap and rusty jack, with its plate sleeves, or it might be, a good
coat of wambesan, than all this finery.  But was it to appraise his
attire, and to comment on the fashion of his cloak or the trimming of
his doublet, you sent me for this person, my lords?"

"Thou art the plainest of all plain-spoken fellows, Blackcastle,"
said his chief; "but thou art the best lance that rides on the land
of the Hepburns.  Nay, we sent for him to have a pot of wine
together, and a little conversation."

"I shall be glad to talk of anything your lordships please," said
Borthwick, rather impatiently; "that is, anything except the battle
off the May, anent which all men now speak, till I have sickened of
it."

"Well, then, canst thou----"

"Nay," whispered the politic Home, "do not _thou_ him, lest we mar
our purpose."

"Can you keep a secret?"

"Yes--if I am paid for it," was the unhesitating reply.

"Can you also be sincere and of service?"

"Yes--if I am very well paid for it."

"Hech!" said Hepburn, "I would take thee to be one of that English
faction who have been Scotland's curse since the days of Alexander
III., and will be so till we have a broader barrier than the Tweed."

Borthwick gave him one of his sour and sinister smiles.  "Men must
live," said he; "but what do your lordships desire?"

"Simply this.  Within the last hour a seaman landed from the ship of
Admiral Wood, and he hath in his gaberdine----"

"Nay," said Blackcastle, "you said before, his pouch."

"Well, well, his pouch--a letter addressed we know not to whom; but
this letter we must have, and if you will procure it by fair means or
foul, we shall pay you bravely."

"You will easily discover him, for all in Leith know and love the
shipmates of Wood; we had made short work with him else," said Home,
haughtily, "for we have lances enough to level the burgh, but seek
not a feud with the Logans of Restalrig; thus I was half forced by
Angus to hang a pikeman yesterday, in defiance of the law of
_Burdingseck_ which sayeth that no man shall be 'hanged for stealing
so much as he can bear on his bark in a poke.'"

"The devil seize all laws!" said Blackcastle.

"So say I," added Borthwick.  "But what manner of man is this sailor?"

"Short and square set," said Home.

"With thick mustachios, a beard, and grey gaberdine?"

"The same--a calfskin girdle and long boots like a horseman's
gambadoes."

"I have him--I know him!  'Tis Wad, the gunner of the _Yellow
Frigate_, one of Sir Andrew's prime seamen."

"I would they were hung together over yonder steeple!"

"I know his howff, and before midnight will undertake to have this
letter, even should I use my poniard for it."

"Use it freely, fellow," said Hailes, putting a hand into the velvet
purse which hung at his glittering girdle.  "My Castle of Hailes,
near Linn-Tyne, is a sure hiding-place, and such as thee need not
fear a feud with the overlord of this regality.  We lodge with the
Lord Angus in the King's Wark; bring us there this looked-for letter
as soon as you find it, and heed not the hour of night."

"We who bide upon the Borders are used to have our rest broken at all
hours," added the other peer.

"Blackcastle, hand these coins to our new ally; and now let us
begone, for there is here that horrid odour of sawdust and stale
liquors which I never knew an hostel to be without."

"Fare-you-well, Master Borthwick," said Lord Home.

"God keep you, sir," added Hailes, turning away.

Borthwick found himself mechanically counting the money as he
descended the stair.  He had received twenty half-lyons, or
five-shilling pieces.

"St. Nicholas, patron of thieves, I honour thee!" thought he.  "What
with the fleurs-de-lys of Sir Patrick Gray, the half-lyons of Lord
Hailes, the rents of my three tenements in Stirling; and the
rose-nobles of King Henry, which are ever descending on me in a
golden shower, I shall die a rich man!  Die--ugh!" he added, with
something between a sneer and a shudder, while he shut his eyes like
one who sees a horror; "why should people die at all, especially when
they have plenty of money?"

"When thou comest to the King's Wark, ask first for the Laird of
Blackcastle," said that personage, who had taken upon himself the
task of seeing this pitiful swashbuckler clear of the tavern.  "And I
pray to St. Anne," thought he, "that this poor mariner may steer
clear of thee, and deliver the fair lady's letter to her
lover--Robert Barton, if all tales be true--for he is a brave good
fellow, and hath fought well for old Scotland, like his father before
him; and God bless all who do so, say I!"




CHAPTER XLVIII.

TIB'S HOWFF.

  "Oh, welcome bat and owlet grey,
  Thus winging low your airy way;
  And welcome moth and drowsy fly,
  That to mine ear come humming by."--_Joanna Baillie._


However, neither the interference of St. Anne, nor the good wishes of
the honest Lothian laird, availed Master William Wad in the matter in
hand, for in five minutes after the interview just related Borthwick
saw him coming up the Broad Wynd, with his thumbs stuck in his
girdle, his bonnet on the back of his head, and his thick crop of
such beard and whiskers as sailors alone have a peculiar facility for
raising encrusted with spray; and he was whistling very loud as he
rolled along, every moment hailing or being hailed by some
acquaintance; for Willie was bent on having a night's amusement
before he went back to the ship.

It was now dusk, and though the little town was full of armed men,
its narrow streets were becoming empty.  They were then alike
destitute of lamps and pavement, and darkened by many a heavy
projecting timber-front and turnpike stair or stone outshot.  Thus
Borthwick followed his victim unseen and with facility as he rambled
along without any apparent object.

On the east bank of the Leith, the banner of Angus waved above the
King's Wark, which stood on the north side of the Broad Wynd, the
houses of which were occupied by his vassals; while the Lairds of
Glendonwyn, Heriotmuir, Bonjedworth, Glenbervie, and ten other
powerful barons, making fourteen heads of houses, all bearing his
surname of _Douglas_, were installed in the best adjacent mansions,
_sans_ leave and _sans_ ceremony.

The King's Wark, which their haughty and presumptuous leader
appropriated to himself (leaving the young prince to occupy the house
of Barton), was a strong and ancient tower, in which the kings of
Scotland occasionally resided--hence its name.  It was surrounded by
a spacious garden, with which it was bestowed by James VI. on a groom
of the bedchamber, Bernard Lindesay, of Lochill, from whom the site
is still named Bernards-street, or Neuk.

The number of armed men, all wearing the Douglas badge, who hovered
about the vicinity of this place, made the gunner avoid it, and he
turned abruptly into a dark and narrow close, which led towards the
Timber Bourse, where an old friend of his, Tibby Tarvet, whose spouse
had been taken prisoner by the Turks, kept a change-house for
mariners, locally known as Tib's Howff.

The alley which led to this place was dark as if the time was
midnight, owing to the height and projection of the houses;
therefore, when Borthwick contrived to meet Wad face to face, he
asked the question, which may still be heard at times in the same
kind of closes in Scottish towns after nightfall--

"Is there any one coming?"

"Yo ho!--heave to, or port your helm," cried Wad, who was already
some "sheets in the wind;" and he added, "the channel's narrow,
whereby I've to mak' short tacks, ye ken."

"Then keep to your left hand," said Borthwick, who having some idea
of using his poniard, wished his right hand free; but then, on a
moment's reflection, he feared to encounter a man so stout as Wad,
and therefore altered his plan, and came roughly and rudely against
him in the dark.

"Damn ye! did I no shout 'Port your helm?'" asked the gunner,
angrily; "whereby we would baith have had sea-room enough to clear
each other."

"Upon my faith, I believe it is my good friend Master Wad!--Master
Wad, good morrow," said Borthwick, with well affected surprise and
satisfaction.

"Yes, I'm Willie Wad, the Laird of Largo's gunner," replied the
seaman, rather sulkily; "I never sail under false colours, or cheat
the king's collectors of dock dues or haven siller, so I value nane a
rope-yarn.  But yo-ho, brother, I have seen you before," he added, as
a light shone through a shutter and showed the gay dress of
Borthwick; so Wad therefore became more suspicious than pleased by
his familiarity, and scrutinized him closely, although various drams
he had imbibed rendered his faculties rather obscure, and his temper
somewhat fractious.

"You have seen me! indeed--and where?" asked Borthwick, who was ready
to assume any character Wad might assign him; for old habit and
experience made him aware that it was safer to be any other person
than _himself_; but Wad dissipated this idea by saying--

"You boarded us off Broughty, when last we came from Holland?"

"True; I had a message from the king to the admiral."

"From the king!" reiterated Wad, dubiously; "and the Admiral--ken ye
him?"

"Well as I know good Robert Barton."

"Then ye ken the twa best men that ever sailed on salt
water--except----"

"The king?"

"Ay, the king, of course," said Wad, touching his bonnet.

Borthwick, who always trembled at that name, now said hastily--

"Are you a king's man?"

"Ye donnart fule! am I not the gunner o' a king's ship?" said the
seaman, who was rather pugnaciously inclined, and began to clench his
hands; "you, who were ashore, fought for the king, I hope?"

"Bravely," said Borthwick, in whose throat the word almost stuck.

"Had you fought against him, I had brained you on the first
timber-head!" hiccuped Wad, making one or two blows in the air.

"Tib Tarvet, the alewife's booth, is close by," said Borthwick; "let
us in, Master Wad, and we shall drink to the admiral's health in a
bicker of her best brown ale; moreover, I would fain hear the story
of this battle off the May."

"Our boatswain spinneth a better yarn than I," said the gunner; "but
as I feel drouthy, and Tib is an auld friend, I care not if I shake
out a reef for an hour or sae, so bear ye ahead, sir."

The alewife's house was soon found, for over her door was the sign
which all brewsters had to put forth under a penalty of four pennies.
An Act of the Parliament passed in those days made it unlawful for a
man "to walk or travell in tyme of nicht, unless he was a man of
great authentic or of gude fame;" and recent outrages committed in
her establishment made the poor alewife somewhat reluctant to unbar
her door, until she heard the familiar voice of Wad; on this she at
once admitted him and his companion, placed a fresh candle in the tin
sconce, which lit her low ceiled and clay-floored apartment, one end
of which was spanned by an enormous fire place, wherein, though the
season was summer, a fire of wood and turf was blazing.  On a
fir-table she placed a trenplate of cakes, and two jugs of foaming
ale, which she brought from a secret place.  The vicinity of so many
lawless vassals and mosstroopers having made her house very unsafe of
late, Tib had allowed her barrels to remain empty, there being
neither wisdom nor thrift in filling them for soldiers who only paid
her by ridicule or abuse.  Some had vowed that she brewed "evil ale,
and should pay them the usual fine of eight shillings for having
_drunk it_;" others swore they "would have her put upon the cuckstule
at Bonnington, and send her ale to the puir or the hospitallers," and
so forth, as Tib, who was a rosy and comely woman of some forty
years, and who had long since contrived to console herself for the
abstraction of her spouse "by the infidel Turks," informed Willie
Wad, while Borthwick listened to the history of her troubles with
great impatience.

While he plied the honest and unsuspecting gunner with Tib Tarvet's
strongest beverage, we may imagine the affectation of interest with
which Borthwick listened to his detail of action, in which he was
painfully minute, and which he loaded with technicalities
unintelligible as Greek or Hebrew to the cunning listener, who bit
his lips with impatience while Wad ardently expatiated on the able
manner in which the poor _Cressi_ was run down; and how the spanking
_Yellow Frigate_, with every stitch of canvas set aloft and alow, was
brought to bear in all her weight and strength on the doomed ship;
how, in rounding to, she won the advantage of the wind, and how the
gallant Barton took her helm; how the braces and bowlines were let go
through the blocks like a whirlwind; how the sheets and tacks were
slacked off and the yards squared like lightning; and how the sea
smoked under her counter, as the heavy ship broke like a thunderbolt
upon the foeman's hull, crashing through and over it!  Then how they
all ranged up alongside of each other, Englishman and Scot--yardarm
and yardarm--muzzle to muzzle--till their portlids and chainplates
rasped together, and men slew each other at the lower deck ports; how
iron grapnels were flung out and lashed to yard-head and gunnel; and
how thus, for so many glasses, they continued that deadly strife,
pouring in the shot of carthouns, sakers, falcons, crossbows, and
arquebusses, while two-handed swords, axes, and mauls, were plied
like flails in a barnyard, and the steel blades rang on the helmets
like a shower of iron hammers upon clinking anvils; how many brave
fellows had fallen in the battle; how many had weathered it, and how
many had died since of their wounds _when the tide ebbed_, the
invariable time of death, according to an old superstition.

Tib, who was somewhat abashed by the gay apparel of Borthwick, sat
knitting in the ingle seat of her wide chimney, and though far aloof,
listening intently to the narration of Wad, in which, as a sailor's
wife and a Scot--for in those days the Scottish women possessed even
more patriotism than their countrymen--she was doubly interested.

Meanwhile the fire blazed on the hearth; the candle guttered and
streamed in the currents of air, and Willie continued to speak, but
thicker and more slowly, of course, while he quaffed pot after pot of
ale; and now he began to remember that "Jamie Gair was waiting for
him at the auld Brig-stairs," just when Borthwick (whose wolfish eyes
were constantly fixed on the pouch containing the letter) resolved to
give him a finishing stroke, by ordering Tib Tarvet to prepare for
him a strong _hot_ pint.

Now, we have elsewhere mentioned, the Scottish pint is similar to the
English quart, and as the required draught consisted of strong ale,
whiskey, and eggs boiled together, and taken hot, it may easily be
supposed that such a decoction was more than sufficient to lay the
unwary gunner, as he afterwards said, "on his beam ends."

Some lingering recollection of where he was, and of the message
entrusted him, flashed upon his memory through the thickening haze
that was overspreading his faculties, and setting the hot stoup, half
drained, upon the board, he reeled up from it.

"Where away?" said Borthwick; "finish thy pot, man--where away so
fast?"

"A lady--a letter," muttered Wad, opening and shutting his eyes in
succession, and rolling his head from side to side; "she gied me a
braw siller chain for my pretty Rose; yo-ho, brother gossip; I must
trip my anchor now--"

"But finish thine ale, friend, to the health cf Andrew Wood."

"Weel, weel,--_there_,--it is a' stowed under hatch," said Willie, as
with a loud whoop he poured the last of the hot ale down his throat;
"and noo," said he, flinging away the stoup, "may I drink bilge, if I
can stay a minute mair--I am getting slow in stays--I yaw and canna
obey my helm--hard up--hard up it is--thou'st owrestowed me--I
careen--hillo--oh!" cried Wad, as he lurched and rolled about, and
then sank prostrate on the bench from which he had just risen.

In his eagerness to obtain the letter, Borthwick would have sprung
upon him and wrenched away his belt-pouch, for every man wore one in
those days, and the goat-skin sporran of the Highland clansman is but
the remnant of the fashion; the gunner, however, lay with his pouch
under him, and he muttered, "Avast, billy, avast," and snorted like a
pig, when the thief turned him over to reach it.

Perceiving that the alewife's attention was directed another way, and
that she was busy in heaping turf upon the fire, he attempted to
unbutton the pouch; but a gleam of sense and suspicion made Wad place
a hand heavily upon it.

Borthwick glanced impatiently at the hostess; she was still bent over
the hearth; he clutched his dagger, and then withdrew his hand as if
the hilt had burned him.

He had never unsheathed that fatal weapon since the terrible night at
Beaton's mill, and even now the blood of him who was the heir of "a
hundred kings" had glued the blade in its velvet scabbard.

"I would soon end thee, fellow," thought he, "but I choose not to
risk my life for bubbles."

Then finding the seaman sunk in a deep and helpless sleep, he tore
open the pouch, and inserting his hand, pulled forth the letter from
among the pieces of cord, gunmatches, fragments of biscuit, cheese,
and ropeyarn, a few coins and other et cetera, which Willie Wad
usually carried in this repository; and then throwing a half-lyon on
the table, Borthwick told Tibby Tarvet to "keep the change, for
looking after this drunken lurdane," and wrapping himself in his
cloak left the house.

* * * * *

Faint and grey the summer morning was stealing down between the lofty
houses of the narrow alley and straggling through the rusty and
cobweb-woven gratings of the windows, into the outer chamber of the
alehouse, when the gunner awoke and started up, with heavy eyes and
an aching head.  The apartment was dark and cold: the _gathering
peat_ was smouldering on the hearth, and a full minute elapsed before
he remembered where he was, and how he came to be there; then the two
pewter flagons and the ale-slopped table recalled his debauch
over-night with some one--a stranger--gaily attired in scarlet and
velvet; and instinctively diving a hand into his pouch, he found the
lady's letter gone!

Master Wad became sober in a moment.

Starting from his seat he examined the pouch; shook it, turned it
outside in; he then opened his gaberdine and examined the lining of
his bonnet; then he searched all about the chamber, and became
convinced that the letter for his captain was lost--irretrievably
lost.

"May I drink bilge, but it's clean awa'!" said he, and stood for a
time bewildered; "and what shall I say to Robert Barton, or to the
winsome lady who gied it, wi' this handsome chain--that I've been
drunk--drunk as a Sluys pilot!  Oh, Willie Wad, Willie Wad--dool be
on thee for this."

The gunner sat down for a moment, and his honest heart was swollen by
the mingled emotions of shame and anger.  He prayed for help to St.
Barbara, who was the patron of all cannoniers, and whose altar stood
in St. Mary's Church close by; but she probably turned a deaf ear to
him, for praying did not mend the matter; then starting up, he
stormed and swore roundly, shouting the while on Tibby Tarvet, whom
he roused without ceremony from her box-bed in one of the lofty
garrets, and whom he threatened with the vengeance of the Baron
Bailie, and all the terrors of the Burgh laws enacted "anent evil
ale-wives," if his lost letter was not forthcoming.

Then Tib stormed in turn, and reminded him that he too was liable to
a fine, or six hours' detention in the iron _jougs_, for being
intoxicated in an ale-house after ten o'clock at night,--for such was
the law.

Finding thus that the hostess might in the end have the best of the
dispute, the poor gunner had to smother his wrath and "sheer off."




CHAPTER XLIX.

THE KING'S WARK.

  "Virtue!--to be good and just---
    Every heart when sifted well,
  Is a clot of warmer dust,
    Mixed with cunning sparks of hell!"


The bell in the tower of St. Anthony's preceptory--a tower demolished
by the English cannon in 1559--was just tolling eleven, when Hew
Borthwick blew the copper horn which hung by a chain at the outer
gate of the King's Wark, and hastily inquired for the Laird of
Blackcastle, or for the Lords Home or Hailes.  These names secured to
him an immediate passage among the Douglases, Homes, and Hepburns who
loitered about or slept on the floor or benches of the passages,
hall, and vestibule, and two pages, having the Hepburn arms--two
Scottish lions rending an English rose--ushered the bravo at once
into a chamber, the walls of which were hung with old amber-coloured
arras, sewn over with red stars and green thistles, the work, it was
said, of Elizabeth, Duchess of Brittany, daughter of James I.

This apartment was encumbered by arms and armour; halberts and lances
were piled against the walls; two large sconces of tin, having in
each four candles, gave sufficient light to the two reckless young
lords, who were playing at chess, and sipping wine from silver cups,
while the pages were conveying away the remains of the baked chicken
and pie of plumdames on which they had just made their rere-supper.

Their daggers, belts, and cuirasses were flung aside, and they wore
loose ample gowns of dark woollen cloth, lined with brightly coloured
silk, and edged with stripes of fine sable.

"Thou hast come betimes, sir," said Hailes; "and doubtless hast
succeeded, too."

"I seldom fail in aught I undertake, my lord.  A ready wit, a clear
head, a bold heart, and nimble hands, are ever required by those who
have light purses and high ambition," was the confident reply.

"Thou hast rather an active tongue too, sirrah," said Lord Home,
frowning.

"'Tis the only inheritance my good mother left me," said the
unabashed Borthwick.

"Enough of this--the letter, if thou hast it!"

Borthwick still lingered, till Hailes scornfully tossed to him a
fleur-de-lys, and then he received the letter at once.  He untied the
ribbons, opened and scrutinized it with stern and curious eyes.  He
then counted the lines repeatedly, and looked at the address--but of
that and the contents neither he nor Hailes could decypher one word.

"Curse on this conjuror's art!" said he; "'tis the Dean of Dunblane
hath taught dame Euphemia and her sisters this clerkly craft.  Had
they learned how to make hippocras, to knead a pasty, to collar a
pig, or to throw a hawk well off, it had been wiser!  Canst thou make
out this devilish scrawl, my lord?"

"Nay, not I, thank God!  If I can mumble _Kyrie Eleison_, or _Christi
Eleison_, at Mass, 'tis all my book lear."

"Ouf! for a fair dame's epistle, what an odour it hath of herrings
and tar!"

And now there was a pause.  Home thrust aside the chessmen; Hailes
took a sip at his wine-cup, and curled up his moustachios, while
Borthwick stood by with a sneer on his face, and watched them,
smiling in his heart at their absurd perplexity.

Now, although so early as the year 1173 the towns of Perth and
Stirling, Aberdeen and Ayr, had their seminaries under the monks, and
others were established in Roxburgh, St. Andrews, and Montrose during
the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries, the Scottish nobles were so
ignorant, that a law was passed at a period subsequent to the reign
of James III. that every peer should send his eldest son to school.
Thus, to the Scots, all of whom--even the lowest and poorest
classes--are now so well educated, the ignorance of the good folks,
their ancestors, must seem extraordinary, if not incredible.

Impatient that Borthwick did not offer to read it, and yet half
ashamed of what the contents might be, Home turned to him with
reluctance, saying,--

"Master Borthwick, wert thou not somewhat of a monk in thy younger
days?"

Borthwick started, and his countenance flushed, as he replied, "To my
shame I acknowledge that I was; I am now a more useful man--but what
of that, my lord?"

"You can read, of course?" said Hailes, a little more gently, and
with a bitter expression of eye, for he felt that he and his friend
were at the mercy of a man whom they disliked and despised.

"Read, if it please you," said Lord Home, and he whispered, while
Borthwick took up the letter, "Fear not its contents, Hailes; if it
contains aught unpleasant, we can stop this fellow's tongue by a gag
of steel, and there are vaults in Home Castle where the light of day
hath never entered: read on."

"'_For Robert Barton of that Ilk--Captain to the Laird of Largo--be
these delivered--_,'" began Borthwick.

"Of that Ilk!" exclaimed the two lords, together, with fierce, and
unutterable scorn; and then they burst into a fit of laughter.

"By St. Anne, this amuses me!" said Hailes, "Read on, good fellow; of
that Ilk--read on."

The noble lord was not so much amused by what followed, for Euphemia
expressed in strong language the horror she and her sister Sybilla
entertained of the two suitors whom their impetuous and ambitious
father had thrust upon them; the letter expressed their double dread
of him and of their uncle, the dean; it detailed the persecution they
were subjected to, and the surveillance with which they were annoyed;
and ended by stating that their marriage days were fixed, but that
they were resolved not to be wedded, at the sword's point, like two
brides among the wild Redshanks who dwelt beyond the Grampians; and
so they begged that Barton and Falconer, if they loved them, would
take measures to save them from such a fate, and become their
protectors.

"'Tis madness--'tis infatuation!" said Home, with something of pity;
"and but for the honour of Lord Drummond's house, and the necessity
for killing these scurvy companions, and preventing the daughters of
our nobles from making alliances so degrading, on my soul I would
leave Lady Euphemia to her lover, Master Robert Barton of--_that
Ilk_."

"And had I not a slender fancy for the pretty Sybilla, and a greater
one for that slice of Strathearn which the old lord promised me, I
would rest contented with the black-eyed dame to whom I am
hand-fasted already; but we must punish their contumacy; and I doubt
not they will become loving wives enough, after we have given their
gallants to feed the gleds."

"So, so; is that all, Master Borthwick?"

"There is a post scriptum, my lord."

"Post--what? is there more of this precious epistle?"

"But a line or two, my lord, hastily pencilled."

"'Tis what we saw her writing," said Home; "and faith, she did look
beautiful as she bent over her tablets, and her heavy locks fell
forward; well, and what saith the post scriptum?"

"'_We will meet you at the chapel of Loretto, beside the Links of
Musselburgh, on Friday, in the evening, for there we mean to spend
the whole night in vigil and in prayer, &c._--E.D."

"At our Lady of Loretto! what a place for an assignation with these
skipper varlets," said Lord Hailes, "those cullionly mongrels!"

"Art sure of this, sirrah?" asked Lord Home, with a terrible frown.

"Sure as I now address your lordship--for I read word for word as it
is written."

"At six in the evening?"

"Six, my lord."

"God's death!" said Hailes, with ferocious joy, "if this meeting take
place, I would not wed the Lord Drummond's daughter had she the crown
of Scotland on her head."

"Nor I her sister, with Brittany and Orkney to boot."

"What then shall we do?"

"Send their letter to its destination, my lords," said Borthwick, who
ever loved to ferment and further mischief; "permit the ladies
quietly to ride forth, but attend the tryst, too--and let them find
their lovers there, but less their heads."

"It shall be so; we'll beset the place, Hailes, and cut them into
gobbets, by my father's soul we will?"

"But Loretto is a holy place."

"What! art thou one of those who deem one place more holy than
another because a shaveling mumbles Latin there?  Well, we will drag
them forth and hang them at the Musselburgh Cross, if you will.  I'll
take a hundred horse and hide them in the woods of Pinkey.
Enough--enough, we'll see to it; and now to send this letter to the
churls at Largo.  The bearer--"

"I left him drunk as a Saxon, and snorting like a pig, in an alehouse
near the Timber Bourse; day has not yet broken, so I may easily
restore it to his pouch without his having missed it, perhaps."

"Good--excellent! away, it lacks but a short time of day-dawn; when
all this matter is over and settled, when the rooks of Pinkey Wood
have gorged them to their fill on those aspiring curs who cross our
plans, I'll make thee, Borthwick--a rascal though thou art--the
richest varlet in my new earldom--away, away!" and laughing and
pushing, he almost put Borthwick out of the room.  When he was gone,--

"Hailes, can we really trust this fellow?" asked Home.

"Trust him!  For gold he would sell his father's bones, and his own
slender chance of salvation; but I'll have him followed, and prove
whether or not he plays us foul."

The messenger of Home was no other than the unwilling Laird of
Blackcastle, who had been sleeping in his armour on a stone bench in
the upper hall of the King's Wark, and who grumbled under his helmet
as he followed Borthwick through the dark and narrow streets of Leith
in the grey light of the morning.

Turning off towards the Timber Bourse he saw him enter the narrow
alley which led to Tibby Tarvet's alehouse, and there he met Willie
Wad in a high state of excitement.

"What ho, Master Wad," said he, "you are abroad betimes."

"Abroad betimes, thou dog-thief and loon; thou'st boarded me like a
pirate in the night, and stolen a letter frae me."

"Beware ye, sirrah, of what you say," replied Borthwick, making a
show of dignified indignation; "beware, for I am a man of a good
repute, that must not be impugned; but if this be the letter you have
lost--"

"It is--it is," said Wad, almost dancing with joy as the other
displayed the missing article; "and where got ye it?"

"Lying at the close-head."

"Say you so?  Could I have dropped it?"

"You know best."

"My deck was overstown wi' usquebaugh--donnart deil that I am, it
must have been so!"

"This letter is of value then??

"I would rather lose my starboard fin than it."

"Then it is well worth a crown."

"To those wha hae crowns to spare," said the gunner.

Borthwick took a firmer grasp of the packet.

"What, will a gay gentleman in a scarlet cloak, chaffer thus wi' a
puir mariner like me?" asked Wad, with astonishment mingled with
contempt.

"I have said the letter is well worth a crown."

"Crowns hae I none--but I will gie what I have, and then let us part;
sorrow be on the hour I met you."

As money poured upon this wretched bravo, avarice grew and
strengthened in his heart; and he omitted no opportunity of gathering
all he could win; knowing well that ere long Scotland would be too
hot to hold him.

"A' I hae is here," said Wad, opening a secret nook in his pouch;
"three rose-nobles, and welcome you are to them."

"Rose-nobles," said Borthwick, suspiciously, and pricking up his ears
at the sound; "where got you them?"

"In the pouch of a dead Englishman.  Take them; the letter, the
letter!" said Willie, losing all patience, and beginning to grasp his
knife with one hand, while by the other he angrily snatched away the
billet.  "You are I doubtna a thief and limmer to boot--despite your
braw gear and laced mantle.  But off! sheer off, I say, or may I
drink bilge, if by one hearty kick I dinna double you up like a bolt
of wet canvas!"

With these complimentary remarks Willie hastened down the Broad Wynd,
crossed the ancient bridge of three arches, where a trifling toll was
levied from every passenger, and reached the boat of Jamie Gair, who
was just preparing to put off without him.  A chill wind was blowing
from the north-east and a white _harr_ was setting in from the German
Sea, so they buttoned up their gaberdines, betook them to the oars,
shot the boat out into the midstream, and in a short time the old
wooden pier of Leith, the Beacon Rock and Partan Craig, were left
astern.  Then they set their lug-sail, and keeping the boat
close-hauled, bore away as nearly as her head would lie to the wind,
for the beautiful Bay of Largo.




CHAPTER L.

THE SUMMER SPEAT.

  "Well mounted on their gallant steeds,
    The brothers led the van;
  And with four-and-twenty troopers gude
    Their midnight march began."--_Ballad._


The fatal Friday was a dark and lowering day; the sun had been hidden
in fiery clouds, and torrents of rain had fallen, swelling all the
mountain streams.  The minds of Euphemia and Sybilla Drummond, though
joyful in the certainty of their loved sister's safety, were
oppressed to some extent by vague forebodings of evil.  Lord Drummond
was still ignorant of his daughter's discovery, for he was absent on
a mission of the insurgents, and was still nursing and maturing his
plans of vengeance against James III., whom he deemed and styled "a
forfeited and fugitive king."

Well attended, guarded, and surrounded as they were by many hundreds
of faithful and obsequious vassals, whose adherence combined the love
of the patriarchal clansman with the servility of the Lowland feudal
serf, the two young lords had little difficulty in having the mansion
of umquhile Sir Andrew Barton closely watched; and on the afternoon
of Friday, Borthwick, who had been lying, _en perdue_, somewhere in
the vicinity, announced to them that the two daughters of Lord
Drummond had "set forth on their pretended pilgrimage to Loretto."

The two noble suitors hastened to assure themselves that such was
indeed the case, and had the chagrin to see them pass out from Leith
by St. Anthony's Porte, their cheeks flushed with fear and pleasure,
and their eyes beaming, well mounted on ambling horses, with long and
sweeping foot-cloths over their saddles, and each attended by a
female servant, who rode on a pillion behind a page, and carried each
a basket of offerings to the hermit.

"They ride fast," said Home, as they whipped their horses across the
level links.

"They will come less speedily back," said Hailes, with his dark but
courtly smile; "a heavy heart makes a slow wayfarer and their hearts
I ween will be heavy enough."

"Two women and two pages----"

"A slender escort this for noble dames."

"Especially in such ticklish times as these."

"True, my lord; but what will not women risk for a lovers' sake?"
said Hailes.

"Two painted pages (I'll have the rascals scourged!) may be guard
enough in Lothian here; but in the Merse, or Teviotdale, a hundred
spears were not a man too many, if one goes but a hundred yards from
one's own gate."

"They have left betimes," said the chief of the Hepburns, looking up
at a dial-stone that projected from the corner of St.  Anthony's Gate.

"And at what time shall we set forth to spoil this precious
pilgrimage--this dainty love-making?"

"Somewhere about six at even," said Hailes.

"Then we shall have the whole night before us."

"All the better; I have directed Borthwick and Blackcastle--"

"I doubt whether my kinsman would like such a conjunct partnership."

"Well, Blackcastle and Borthwick," said Home, impatiently, "with
twenty of my most unscrupulous mosstroopers--Johnstones, thieves of
Annandale, men who would spear their own brother if I wished them--to
be all in their jacks betimes, and mounted to ride with us."

"Pleasant and honourable company," said Lord Hailes, with a smile.

"But fitted for the occasion, my lord," replied Home, firmly; "we
know not but those scurvy fellows, Barton and Falconer, may have some
of their ruffianly seamen with them; and if so, by my father's hand
and by the crest of Home, though it be beneath our rank to draw on
varlets such as these, I'll not leave in all Loretto one alive to
tell the story to their admiral!"

As he spoke, Home clenched one hand, and with the other thrust his
furred cap of maintenance over his dark and fiery eyes.

"Good, my lord; farewell until we meet again," said Hailes; "if
to-day we do not teach these fellows a sharp lesson, this glorious
raid against the court and king, and that most signal triumph before
the walls of Stirling, have been less than vain."

And these two ferocious and unlettered nobles, though bent upon
committing one of those atrocities which occurred daily among their
proud, turbulent, and unpatriotic class in Scotland, bowed and parted
as quietly and as pleasantly as if their appointed tryst had been for
a pleasant evening ride in some green lane, instead of one for
sacrilege and murder.

The troop of twenty men, who assembled near a gate of the King's
Wark, and from thence set forth under the guidance of the two nobles,
the Laird of Blackcastle and their new ally, Hew Borthwick, in their
aspect and appearance did full justice to that character for ease and
flexibility of conscience ascribed to them by Lord Home.  They were
all strong, dark, and sinewy men, whose forms were hardened into mere
bone and brawn, and were durable as iron; for they were lawless
mosstroopers, Scottish Bedouins, in fact; men who won every meal at
the spear's point, and lived in their harness; men whose dwellings
were among wild morasses, pathless woods, and inaccessible mountains;
where law was never known, and religion little heard of; wild and
predatory warriors, who fought against their countrymen as readily as
against the common enemy that dwelt beyond the frontier; for, like
the Ishmaelities, their hands were upraised against all men.

Their armour, which consisted of a splinted jack with plate sleeves
and steel gloves, head-piece and gourgerin, was all rusty and well
dinted by many a sword-cut and lance-thrust.  Their beards and
whiskers flowed out between their steel cheek-plates, ample and
uncombed as the shaggy manes of their strong and active border
steeds.  Well-armed and fleetly-mounted, Home and Hailes, divested of
every distinguishing badge, rode together at their head.

Wheeling off the main street between the hedge-rows of the
Cotefield-loan, the whole party crossed the green and sandy links,
and entered on the vast and purple expanse of the Figgate-muir, which
was covered by the mossy stumps of an old druidical forest, whose
roots are yet turned up by the plough and spade.

Shrill blew the wind, and drearily boomed the waves upon their left.
The estuary of the Forth looked black as ink, and its billows rolled
in white foam upon the lonely beach with a deep and hollow sound.
The slanting aspect of the clouds showed that the rain, which had
been pouring all that morning in torrents, was again about to
descend; and though the party rode fast to escape it, they had only
reached the little Chapel of Saint Mary Magdalene, which stood among
some coppice near a stream that poured through a ravine into the sea,
when it descended with such fury as almost to blind even the border
riders, and the wind blew as if it would have blown its last, driving
the sand from the shore across the open moor, and forcing the
horsemen to seek shelter in the grove, while the two lords dismounted
and entered the chapel, the door of which stood open, and before the
altar of which they made the usual involuntary genuflection, by
half-kneeling and signing the cross; and this, with them, was a very
useless piece of mummery.

"How unlucky!" said Home, as the rain continued to fall in torrents
upon the stone roof of the little oratory, while the stream beside it
rolled in red foambells upon the beach; "this devilish tempest may
spoil all, and there seems little chance of its lulling soon."

"Had our meeting with these rascals been elsewhere than at Loretto,
there might not perhaps have been a storm."

"Art really so weak as to think this?" said Home.

"I know not what to think--but I like it not," replied his companion,
shrugging his shoulders; for he was not without his share of the
superstition incident to the time and country.

"How," continued Lord Home, with a lowering expression in his keen
and fiery eyes, as he seated himself on a stone bench near the steps
of the rude altar, and dashed the water from his plume; "your words
would imply that Heaven itself was against us."

"I know not; but this sudden storm hath broken on us with wondrous
fury, and here we are forced to draw our bridles within four miles of
the place."

"Rest assured, my good lord, that Heaven leaves you and me to mind
our own affairs.  The elements would never be at peace if storms were
raised to cross every man's purpose in Scotland; and least of all
will they raise such an infernal hubbub as this to save a couple of
scurvy varlets, who must swing, even as their companions swung, over
Lander Bridge, in our raid of '82.  There is one comfort, however,"
continued the practical but irreverent chief of the Homes, listening
for a moment as the wind howled through the unglazed windows of the
edifice, and the rain drenched the copsewood near it, and hissed
along the beach till surf and sand were smoking; "we may be assured
that the same storm which stays us here must keep our fair dames in
shelter at Loretto, while it may also save us all trouble by kindly
sending their lovers to feed the fishes of the Firth."

"But suppose we find the cockbirds flown?"

"Think not of such a disappointment."

"Yet such a thing is possible."

"Remember that Lady Euphemia, in her precious post scriptum, spoke of
spending the night in vigil and in prayer."

"Profound prayer no doubt it will be, with a couple of saucy gallants
to hold their tapers and turn the missal leaves," said Hailes, with a
smile of contempt.

"St. Mary, how the sky darkens!"

"And how the rain comes down!"

"This burn beside us is swelling into a perfect torrent."

"How fare our rogues of Annandale in the thicket?"

"Ill enough, I doubt not," replied the Laird of Blackcastle; "and
methinks they were as well riding as standing there, like todlowries
under a lynn."

"You forget that no man could keep his saddle in such a tempest of
wind," said Lord Home.

"Of a surety it must portend some coming evil; a pestilence, or an
English invasion," added the superstitious Hailes.

As the chapel of Loretto stood in a solitary place beyond the eastern
gate of Musselburgh, the two lords arranged that, on setting forth
again, when once the Esk was crossed, it should be surrounded, an
alarm given, and that all should be killed who issued forth--every
man at least; for they had no wish to incur the vengeance of a
tyrannical hierarchy which was full of power and strength, by
actually slaughtering their victims within the walls or precincts of
a church, if such a catastrophe could be possibly avoided.

But while, within a holy place, and close to the altar of their
religion and their God--the symbolical throne, before which they had
each gravely, and not the least in mockery, made a low
reverence--they sat planning this projected outrage, and combining
with their own views such suggestions as the mischievous and
blood-thirsty spirit of Borthwick proposed, the storm still continued
to howl along the shore; the rain still poured in one broad and
blinding cataract; and torn from the woodlands by the furious wind,
the wet leaves were whirled and swept in myriads across the moor,
which at times was shrouded in mist and spray; and for hours this
continued, with occasional gleams of lightning; and the mosstroopers,
who had unsaddled their terrified horses and haltered them to the
trees, now crowded, all drenched and disconsolate, into the dreary
little chapel beside their leaders, where they grumbled and muttered
under their thick beards, while drinking raw whiskey from their
portable leather flasks and horn quaighs.

As the evening drew on and the place grew dark, they were not without
their own fears that the elements were indeed in league against them;
and now, enraged that their well-matured stratagem should be crossed
by an intervention so unlooked for, their lords sat in sullen
silence, listening to the din without; and the time seemed
interminably long, for there were then no watches to mark the passing
hours, and even had a dial been there, without the sun it had been
useless.

"At last," said Home, "at last the wind lulls!  Horse and spear, my
Annan wights--let us mount, and begone!"

The horses were soon saddled and their riders mounted.  Though the
wind had lulled, the rain poured down as furiously as ever.  The time
was now past nine in the evening; but the gloomy aspect of the sky
made the drenched landscape and the sea look very dark, for the sun
had set enveloped in dense banks of opaque and murky cloud, behind
the Ochil peaks, Dumiat, and the hills of Alloa.

The riders soon passed the hamlet named the Fisher Row, and reached
the ancient bridge of the Roman Municipium, the arches of which still
span "the mountain Esk," the opposite bank of which was covered with
copsewood, where the dark and heavy oak mingled its thick crisped
foliage with the lighter spray of the pale-green sauch and the
feathery ash-tree.  This venerable bridge consists of three quaint
high and narrow arches, "over which," says one of our modern writers,
"all of noble or kingly birth that approached Edinburgh for at least
a thousand years must have passed; which has witnessed the
processions of monks, the march of armies, and the trains of kings;
which has rattled beneath the feet of Mary's ambling steed, and
thundered beneath the war-horse of Cromwell."

Swollen by the summer flood, the Esk was found by our troopers to be
rolling in one vast sheet of foam under the three arches, each of
which are fifty feet in width; and in froth and spray its red current
lashed furiously against their strong abutments, sweeping the mingled
spoil of field and fell, uprooted trees, straw, hay, and grass, farm
implements, rafters, and garden-pales, with the rolling carcasses of
sheep and cattle, into the harbour, which was _then_ so deep as to
admit the largest merchantmen of Norway, of Pomerania, and of
Holland; and many of these vessels, built in that quaint style which
the Dutch have yet retained unchanged, were riding with all their
anchors out, to stem the furious _speat_.

The narrow pathway of the bridge was then barred or spanned by a
transverse arch and an iron gate, traces of which are yet remaining
in the parapets.  The warder dwelt in a small house on the other
side, and as the barrier was closed, the night darkening fast, and
the rain still pouring down, the two lords and their drenched
mosstroopers halloed loudly and impatiently for passage through; but
the keeper of the gate paid not the slightest attention to their loud
and angry summons.

"Hark," said Lord Hailes; "what hour is that now striking?"

The mournful notes of an old bell were now heard, but faintly and far
between, upon the gusts of wind.

"Ten by Musselburgh clock," said Borthwick; "ten, and we still loiter
here!"

Above the trees they could discern, against the murky sky, quaint
steeple of the Town House, in which there yet remains a bell-clock of
the fifteenth century, which was presented to the burgh by their High
Mightinesses, the States of Holland.

The dusk was now so deep that the foliaged bank opposite seemed all
black and solid; and the white and foaming river boiled and thundered
past so rapidly and fiercely, that the boldest trooper among our
adventurers shrunk from attempting to swim his horse across it; for
if they essayed it above the bridge, they ran the chance of being
brained against the arches, on which the stream had risen; and if
below it, of being powerlessly swept with the _débris_ of its banks
among the boats and shipping.  Red and fiery, the stars were seen to
peep at times between the flying scud, while the dark trees tossed
their foliage on the gusty wind, like the black plumes of our modern
Scottish infantry.

At times a mournful cry rose amid the gloom that enveloped the
rolling river, and the grim horsemen reined back their reeking
steeds, and looked darkly and inquiringly in each other's faces.

"Hear ye that, sirs?" said the Laird of Blackcastle.  "What doth it
sound like?"

"The monks chanting _De Profundis_ in St. Michael's Kirk," said Lord
Hailes.

"God's malison on this base runnion of a warder!" cried Borthwick,
impatiently.

"Hark!" said Hailes; "there comes that wailing cry again!"

"'Tis the Water Kelpie!" muttered the troopers, for the belief in
that aquatic demon was yet strong in Scotland; and thus there was not
a rider there who did not tremble at the idea of being drawn by that
voracious fiend into his den below the flood.

"By my soul, I'll ride the river," said Hailes, boldly; "there should
be a ford here, I think but the darkness is such that I cannot see."

"Beware in Heaven's name, my lord," cried Blackcastle, anxiously
throwing his horse before the charger of his chief; "beware, lest
your life be needlessly perilled; for even were the flood stemmed, ye
may not abide the Kelpie's grasp.  Listen to me," he continued,
speaking breathlessly; "I had once a narrow escape from one at the
Brig of Tyne, when last I crossed it during a Lammas flood.  I had
bought me a black horse from a strange-looking carle at the
Haddington market; and at the sight of water, however far off, this
horse became wild and frantic; it kicked, plunged, and neighed; and
when we offered him a drink, he dashed over the bucket, and laved its
contents about him with delight.  When I rode him along the bridge at
the Nunraw, he uttered an awesome yell as he rose into the air with
me, and sprang over the parapet; and lo! I found myself astride a
kelpie in that black Lammas flood, at mirk midnight!  He turned upon
me with open jaws, and eyes that blazed with fire!  But I signed the
cross between us, and then he sunk from me, yelling like a fiend as
he was; and drowned I had been assuredly, had I not caught the branch
of a sauch-tree and reached the shore----"

"And thy devilish horse-couper, what of him?"

"He was never more seen."

"St. Mary! he must have been the devil!" said Hailes.

"Or Michael Scott of Balwearie," said Home.

"Blackcastle, blow thy bugle," said his chief, "and we'll crop the
gate-ward's ears if they hear it not."

"Woe to the loitering villain!" grumbled Home.

"His gudewife will be keeping him a-bed," said the other lord; "and
perhaps the poor man dare not rise."

"I _have_ heard that the grey mare is the better horse here," said
Blackcastle, as he blew a startling blast; "and I have seen good
proof that the poor gate-ward is only Joan Tamson's man, as the saw
hath it."

"How----"

"The rosemary sprig borne at their wedding now flourishes in his
kail-yard, like a green bay-tree."

"The drowsy rascal; I'll strew its branches on his coffin board.
Blow again!"

Once more Blackcastle poured the notes of his horn to the wind; and
as the echoes mingled with the roaring of the river and the moaning
of the trees, that low wailing cry, so chilling to their hearts, was
heard again; and now lights began to twinkle in the warder's cottage.

"Pest upon thee, villain!" said Borthwick; "while we are detained
here, our birds may indeed be flown from Loretto.  He ought to know
'tis no ordinary errand that bringeth men abroad in weather such as
this."

As he spake a white figure, evidently that of a woman in a long
dress, appeared on the opposite bank of the stream, and beckoned
repeatedly to the troopers to attempt the ford.

"'Tis the keeper's wife," said one; "I ken the carlin weel by her
lang luggit mutch."

"'Tis the Kelpie--beware, beware!" said another, while their horses
trembled, kicked, and plunged, and their eyes shot fire, as a deadly
terror seemed to possess them--a terror easily communicated to their
superstitious riders.

Still the figure pointed to the ford and beckoned impatiently.

"Thank you, mistress," cried Hailes; "but we would rather not attempt
it; so instantly open the gate."

But she continued to beckon, and her voice, if she used it, was lost
in the howling of the wind and the hoarse roaring of the stream; so,
finding their horses were becoming quite unmanageable, Lord Home lost
his temper, a commodity which he was ever losing and long of
recovering.

"Hag!" he exclaimed; "undo the gate, or begone at once _to hell_!"

On this, it is related, a wild shriek was heard, and the white
wavering figure disappeared.

At the same moment, the warder came hurriedly and opened the barrier.

"Wretched varlet!" said the imperious Home, giving the man a blow
with his clenched hand; "thou hast kept us waiting long enough; why
did not that hag of thine open the gate, instead of seeking to wile
us by the ford?"

"A thousand humble pardons, noble gentlemen," stammered the poor
warder; "but--but--a hag, said ye?"

"Ay, thy gudewife, carle," said Blackcastle; "I know her well enough
by her long-eared coif."

"God assoil us!  Ye have seen a spirit; for my wife was drowned at
the ford this fatal morning, and noo we are streekin' her puir wat
corpse for the burial!  Oh! sirs," wept the keeper, "what is this
o't--what is this o't?"

"By St. Mary! we have seen a spectre!" shouted Hailes, dashing spurs
into his horse, and clearing the bridge at abound; and furiously all
the train followed him through the dark but wide street of
Musselburgh.

This event shed a species of horror over the whole party, whose
faculties, never very clear at any time, were past inquiring whether
or not it was a supernatural figure they had seen; so they all
spurred on to leave the bridge and stream behind, and to reach
Loretto as soon as possible.  But whether the delay which occurred at
the gate was productive of good or evil consequences to the lovers at
the Hermitage, another chapter or so will disclose.




CHAPTER LI.

LADY EFFIE'S LETTER.

  "But now we part, and it may be that years shall wing their flight
  Ere thou again wilt cheer my heart, or rise upon my sight;
  Then fare thee well! in other days, in years of after life,
  On fancy's wings, I'll turn to thee, and bless the land of Fife."--_Anon_.


The weather had become gloomy, and continued so.  Though the month
was merry and sunny June, and all the woods of fertile Fife were then
in their fullest foliage, the sky lowered heavily over the German
Sea, and the waves of the Firth broke sullenly on the pillared bluffs
of Grail and Elie; and, driven by the east wind, the breakers of
Largo Bay broke furiously upon the Dyke, and dashed their spray on
the sandy shore beyond it.

This noble bay, in which the Scottish ships and their prizes were
still at anchor, forms a semicircle of about ten miles of coast,
marked by a peculiar ridge of sand, called by fishermen the Dyke, and
old tradition says it was a wall or rampart, that ran from Kincraig,
round all the bay, to Methul, and that it contained a forest, called
the Wood of Forth.  In corroboration of this, the anchors of ships
have been known to drag up the roots of oaks from their beds in the
sand below.

The _Yellow Frigate_ and her consorts rode quietly there at anchor,
and safe from every wind but a south one.

Mean while, in Largo House there was a gay and joyous company, for
the hospitable old admiral made all welcome--Englishman and Scot--to
the noble dwelling with which the grateful king, James III., had
gifted him.  The castle was old, for in ancient times it had been a
jointure-house of the queens consort, and built, some say, for
Jolande de Dreux, the bride of Alexander III.  Northward of it rose
the conical hill of Largo, green to its summit, which stands nine
hundred feet above the yellow shore.  Near the castle grew a pine
coppice, in the centre of which yawned a wild and deep ravine, the
_Keil's Den_, famous in the annals of sorcery and horror.  Through
this brawled a mountain burn, which rushed to meet the waters of the
bay.

The noble barony of Largo had been granted by James III. to his
favourite admiral, because it was the place of his birth, the royal
donor considering, "Gratuita et fidelia servicia sibi per familiarem
servitorem suum Andream Wod, commorante in Leith, tam per terram,
quam per mare, in pace et guerra, gratuiter impensa, in Regno Scotiæ
et extra idem, et signanter CONTRA INIMICOS SUOS ANGLIA, et dampnum
per ipsum Andream inde sustenta, suum personam gravibus vitæ
exponendo periculus 18 die Martii, 1482;" for thus runs his charter,
which is yet preserved in the office of the great seal of Scotland.

The evening was grey; a mist was settling over the estuary and the
woods and hill of Largo looked dark and nigh; on the tower, head of
the admiral's mansion, Barton and Falconer were pacing to and fro,
with their quarter-deck step, conversing on their chances in love and
war, and awaiting the return of Willie Wad, whom, as related, they
had, on the previous day, despatched to Leith with letters to the
sisters.

The admiral was on board the fleet, seeing after the repair of
damages and awaiting tidings of the lost king or the rebellious
barons.

Howard and Margaret Drummond were seated together on the cushioned
seats of a deep window in the hall.  It overlooked the wooded glen,
through which the yellow sunlight straggled in the haze of the misty
evening; and both were silent and sad, for their hearts were occupied
by many heavy thoughts.

That of Howard was full of Margaret; but her heart was wandering away
to Rothesay and their child.

She was very pale, yet a tinge of health had returned to her soft
cheek, now that hope was reviving in her breast; now that she was no
longer the secret prisoner of Henry and the victim of his cold
intrigues; and now that she was about to be restored to the powerful
protection of her father, and her youthful husband.  With her white
hand she playfully caressed a large Scottish staghound, which had
ventured to nestle his great rough head upon her knees.

Her fine bright hair, which she had long neglected--at least during
her sad sojourn on board the _Harry_--was now smoothly braided above
her forehead, and it shone like threads of gold in the occasional
sunbeams that stole through the deep embayment of the window; and
nothing could be prettier or more becoming than the fashion of her
blue velvet hood, with its white satin lining, tied by twelve little
friars' knots of fine silver--a favourite ornament with the Scottish
belles of the time.

Howard thought he had never seen her looking so beautiful or so
seductive; and she believed that she had never seen him more sad and
more silent.

The residence of a day or two in the lonely Castle of Largo, in the
society of the gentle Drummond, with the painful certainty of a total
separation now close at hand, had sealed the fate of the poor English
captain, by destroying his happiness for ever.

"Then I have no hope now--none?" said he, gazing upon her tenderly
and earnestly, as he referred to a previous and most anxious
conversation.

"It is most painful, good Howard, that my lips should--" said
Margaret, with hesitation, "should ever confirm anything that--that
is calculated to make unhappy a heart so kind, so noble, and so true
as thine: but oh, I beseech you to be assured, that to love me is
indeed a hopeless task."

"Curse on our king's cold-blooded policy!" he exclaimed, in
bitterness and sorrow.  "Had I known you under kinder and better
auspices,--under any other than as the compatriot of infamous
abductors, you had perhaps listened to me with more approbation.  I
am indeed unfortunate--more unhappy than the power of language can
convey."

He paused, and Margaret sighed with impatience.

"My heart, that never knew another love, is all your own, sweet
Margaret; it became so from that time when over your senseless form I
spread my cloak in pity; on that unfortunate night at Dundee; a night
to me the source of mingled joy and woe, for then I knew you first."

"Alas, poor Edmund Howard; you were indeed born under an evil star."

"Madam, it had been well for me if, in our battle in the Downs, a
shot from Barton's ships had ended my career, before this northern
mission was devised.  I had then been spared the pain of losing
you--of loving you in vain!"

He turned his eyes away, and pressed his hands upon his breast, for
the depth of his emotion was great.

Margaret gazed upon him with mournful interest: he was indeed most
winning in manner and noble in aspect, for he was the stateliest
captain in all King Henry's infant fleet.

His face and form were unexceptionable, and his attire was gorgeous.
His tunic was cloth-of-gold, brocaded, and fastened by twenty little
clasps, studded with diamonds, and on each breast were six slashes of
blue silk.  A collar of twelve pearls, with twelve medallions of the
apostles, encircled his neck, and at the end of it hung his silver
whistle, his badge of office and command.  His cap was of scarlet
velvet, edged with pearls; his long hose were of fawn-coloured silk,
and his shoes of crimson leather.

"Captain Howard," said Margaret, after a long and painful pause, "I
will make you the partner of a secret, if, on your honour, you
promise me to keep it from others; for it is of mighty import to
me,--a secret valuable as life, dear as honour."

"Oh, command me, madam," said Howard, kneeling down and removing his
cap, full of that chivalric enthusiasm which was peculiar to the time
as well as to the man.  "Your wish shall teal my lips as close as
death himself."

"Well, my kind, good Howard, imagine how I have suffered by your
professions of love to me, and how much is the pity I feel, when
obliged to acknowledge that I am the wedded wife of the crown prince,
and am now, by virtue of this _his ring_, the Duchess of Rothesay,
and Countess of Carrick."

Howard was paralysed by this fatal intelligence; again he clasped his
hands, and his nut-brown cheek grew ashy pale.

"Oh, madam," said he, "to me your secret is worse than death; for now
I am indeed hopeless, crushed, and ruined Honour and love are alike
lost to me!  The wife of Rothesay--"

"Wedded to him, Howard, a year ago, in my uncle's cathedral of
Dunblane.  'Tis best to know the worst at once--ay, wedded!"

"Despite his betrothal to a princess of England?"

"Despite a more serious barrier--our ties of blood; and hence this
fatal secresy."

"Oh, most fatal--fatal, at least, to me!  But say, dear madam, knew
Henry our king of this espousal?"

"He knew not, or, knowing, little cared: but the Bishop of Dunblane
has been lawlessly seized on his way from Rome with our dispensation,
and now well must Henry know this well-kept secret, which was hidden
even from my father and my own beloved sisters."

Now there was a long and sorrowful pause.

Howard felt assured that he could urge nothing more, and Margaret,
after a time, spoke kindly to him of other things--but in vain; for
his passion for her was the only idea that had soothed, or made him
forget at times the mortification of being a prisoner, and of his
late defeat--a defeat so remarkable, when the smallness of the
attacking force is considered: but history shows us, that in all his
battles Sir Andrew Wood never feared to encounter double his strength
at any time, and never encountered without being victorious; so, on
that score Howard had no reason for shame.

Meanwhile, the communings of Robert Barton and Sir Davis Falconer on
the bartizan overhead were interrupted by the appearance of Master
Wad, who, bonnet in hand, ascended to their lofty promenade by the
narrow wheel-stair of a turret, that gave admittance to the
battlement, and which yet overlooks the orchard of the house.

"Welcome, good shipmate," said Barton.

"Well, what tidings, Willie?" added Falconer; for in Scotland it is
still the kindly custom with persons in authority to address
inferiors by their _Christian_ name.

Not conceiving it conducive either to his interest or reputation to
relate how he had lost, and so narrowly regained, the letter of Lady
Euphemia, the gunner smoothed down his obstinate forelock, made the
invariable scrape with his foot, and delivered the missive to Robert
Barton; after which he hurried away to join one whom he deemed his
own peculiar prisoner,--the pretty English Rose, who had been also
awaiting his return.

"It is from Euphemia!" said Barton, reading it hurriedly; "from dear
Effie; and she says it must equally suffice for one from Sybilla to
you.  It tells of close surveillance, of their father's roughness,
and their new lovers' cool insolence and quiet pertinacity.  'Sdeaih!
would we were alongside of them for three minutes--only three
minutes, Davie.  A time has been fixed for their marriage----"

"Their marriage!" reiterated Falconer, stamping his heel on the
bartizan.

"They dread the arrival of their uncle the dean--"

"A stern man--hard of heart and dark of brow; I know him well."

"And implore us to find a place where they can be sheltered until
these troubles are past, and the army of the insurgent lords is
disbanded.  Moreover, they promise to meet us on Friday evening at
the Chapel of Loretto, beside the Links of Musselburgh--kind Effie!"

"We'll keep the tryst," said Falconer; "Loretto--know ye the place,
Robert, for we must not wander much on yonder side of Forth?"

"I know it well; 'tis a run of eighteen miles across the river, and
we'll take the ship's pinnace or the boat of Jamie Gair, which lies
yonder, anchored by the Dyke; but to find them a place of shelter,
that puzzles me sorely!"

"If dear Sybie would but marry me--"

"Perhaps she would, David, now, when matters are at the worst; but
where would you place her, while you were afloat--eh?"

"Alas!  I have neither house nor hold--nor any home, but the _Yellow
Frigate_."

"Nor I; for now these rebel lords have seized my manor of Barnton and
my father's house in Leith; but I hope soon to make a clear ship of
them."

"Then all those dog-nobles would cry aloud for vengeance, at the
sisters taking shelter with us."

"Two jovial young bachelors."

"Nay," said Falconer, with a sigh of anger; "as two plebeians, whose
presumption brought dishonour on a noble house."

"Let them cry; it suits their fancy."

"But we must find a secret as well as sure place, lest they be
carried off from us at the sword's point; for the Lords Drummond,
Hailes, and Home, could march with ease five thousand men to recover
them.  I know their power better than thee, Robert, the half of whose
life, and more, has been spent upon the water.  Besides, Lady
Euphemia has written to you, perhaps, when spurred on by some keen
excitement; and it may so chance that when the time comes, they will
shrink from committing themselves to our care."

"What!  Effie shrink from committing herself to the care of her
betrothed?  Thou art a timid lover, Davie."

"I am crushed in spirit by my evil fortune."

"When their hearts are touched, women (and to their glory be it said)
scorn alike the vaunted rubbish of feudal pride and the cold north
wind of worldly prudence!  Besides, who has a better right to secure
the safety of Lady Effie than I?  Am I not her affianced husband,
whose ring of promise is on her finger?  Stay--thou knowest, Davie,
that my aunt, Robina Barton, is prioress of the Grey Sisters at
Dundee; and for the love she bears us, she will gladly keep the three
sisters until this breeze blows past and the king's authority is
enforced."

"Right, Rob; I would rather trust them with that reverend lady and
her good Claresses, than in the strongest castle in Scotland.  For
these lords might storm and sack the stronghold--even the Bass
itself,--when they dare not molest the poor nuns; but we must consult
the admiral--"

"He is on board the ships in the bay."

"Or Howard--but then he is an Englishman, and consequently knows
little or nothing of Scotland or her customs."

"But he is a brave fellow, a foeman though he be," said Barton, with
a darkening face; "and I might learn to love him had not my father
fallen in battle by his brother's hand."

Leaving the two friends and lovers to arrange, consider and
reconsider their plans,--leaving poor Howard to console himself the
best way he can,--leaving the admiral busied about his ships and
their prizes, while his gunner and coxswain, though staunch Scotsmen,
were yielding to English influence, like greater men in more modern
times, but after a more honourable fashion, for they were lowering
their colours to the pretty Cicely, and the bright-eyed Rose, on whom
their kind leader had bestowed two carcanets of silver, studded with
those beautiful stones which are found upon the beach of Fife, and
from their deep red colour are called Elie Rubies--leaving Father
Zuill busied in the development of the great parabolic speculum,--and
leaving young Margaret sighing with impatience to rejoin her boy
husband, we will change the scene to the other side of the river.




CHAPTER LII.

THE HERMIT OF LORETTO.

  "'Tis your belief the world was made for man;
  Kings do but reason on the self-same plan.
  Maintaining yours, you cannot theirs condemn,
  Who think, or seem to think, man made for them."--_COWPER._


Among all the places esteemed for sanctity, at a time when a singular
mixture of high religious veneration and a strong faith amounting to
adoration and sublimity, united to gross superstition,--existed in
the land, there was none in Scotland so famous as the chapel and
hermitage of Our Lady of Loretto, which stood a little way without
the eastern gate of Musselburgh.

It belonged to the abbots of Dunfermline, and had been built in an
age anterior to all written record; so now, we know not when it was
founded or by whom.  The obscurity in which its early history was
enveloped left fancy free, and thus the fane enjoyed a celebrity for
holiness second only to the Cottage of the Nativity, like which, it
became famous for effecting supernatural cures and conversions on
visitors and devotees.

The nuns of St. Catharine of Sienna patronised the cell and sought
the prayers of the ascetic who dwelt in the hermitage.  In August,
1530, before visiting France, James V. made a pilgrimage of more than
forty miles on foot, to Loretto.  Ladies about to be delivered sent
there their childbed linen, to obtain the "odour of sanctity."  If
they recovered, the hermit attributed it to the powers of the shrine;
if they died, to their own evil and sin.  There, it was affirmed that
sight had been restored to the blind, and strength to the lame; but
under the coarse and pungent satires of Sir David Lindesay of the
Mount, and one in particular by John Knox, beginning--

  "I, Thomas the Hermit, in Loreitte,
  Sanct Francies Order do heartillie greet,"

the shrine ultimately lost all reputation and honour; it was
demolished, and its materials form the present Tolbooth of the
town--little more being left of Loretto than the name and a vault
under a wooded mound.

By the decline of the Church, and the general decay of religious
sentiment, before the Reformation, the pilgrimages to Loretto became
mere scenes of debauchery and an excuse for licentiousness.

In the days of James III. the shrine enjoyed its ancient fame--pure
and undefiled; and Father Fairlie, the Franciscan who then occupied
the hermitage, afterwards attained a great age, for he was the
immediate predecessor of the Father Thomas referred to in the pasquil
of Knox.  Though a pious enthusiast in some respects, he was not at
all one of those who thought

  "To merit heaven by making earth a hell."

He had been a soldier in his youth, and fought in the Douglas wars;
so he said his office daily and never omitted his prayers, or
withheld kind advice from those who sought his shrine; and yet
withal, he enjoyed the various good things of this life that came his
way.  Thus, though he went abroad barefooted and wore the grey
woollen gown and cowl, with the knotted girdle prescribed by his
patron St. Francis of Assisi, he was one of the most sleek and well
fed of the brotherhood in Scotland.

It was towards the afternoon of that stormy day described in a recent
chapter.  From the Firth a cool wind blew over the sandy knolls and
broomy hollows of Musselburgh Links; the old woods of Pinkey and the
venerable oaks around the Chapel of Loretto moaned in the rising
wind, and their damp foliage whistled drearily.  The sky wore a dingy
grey hue to the eastward, darkening as it approached the horizon,
which served as a background, and against which the white curling
waves of the Firth rose and fell, while the bitter surf boomed far
along the echoing shore.

No less than three substantial burgess-wives of the "honest town" had
been at the shrine on this morning, craving the prayers of the
hermit; one for the recovery of her spouse, who was a leper on
Inchkeith; a second that her child might be cured of the croup; and a
third that her husband might escape from the Turks, who had taken him
prisoner in the Levant, all of which Father Fairlie promised should
be done "without delay, if they had _faith_;"--however, each had what
was of more importance to him, a basket of viands, ready cooked,
which they deposited and departed.

The hermit, after a long and sorrowful contemplation of a daintily
roasted duck and side of lamb, was compelled (the day being Friday)
to content himself with a couple of pounds of kippered salmon, five
or six buttered eggs, and a quart of Rhenish wine for dinner; after
which he stroked his paunch, made a sign of the cross three times,
and blessed the three burgess-wives in his heart.  He then drew his
grey cowl over his face, and walked forth upon the beach for the
double purpose of gaining an appetite for supper and saying "his
office," or daily set of prescribed prayers in Latin; though some
persons who were envious of the popularity enjoyed by Friar Fairlie
among the maids, wives, and widows of the honest town--for so was
Musselburgh named, _par excellence_, by the Regent Randolph in
1333--averred that he knew no more of Latinity than a few scraps,
with which he incessantly interlarded his conversation; and as the
said scraps sounded very mysterious and holy, they were not without
having a due and potent effect upon the simple-minded folks who heard
them.  Some were rash enough to assert that at vespers he had been
heard in his hermitage singing, "Jollie Martin," and that old ditty
which became so famous in the time of James V.--

  "Bill wilt thou come by a lute
  And belt thee in Sanct Francis cord;"

but all this we verily believe to have been mere scandal, raised by
the chaplains of other oratories in the burgh, who belonged to rival
orders, and were envious of the fame enjoyed by the poor Franciscan
hermit and his shrine at Loretto, without the gate.

The attention of our new friend the recluse was divided between his
daily office, which he repeated drowsily and mechanically, and in
watching the lowering of the sky and sea, on which a boat with her
large lug-sail squared was running straight for the beach which
bordered the links.

She cut through the water, riding over, or cleaving asunder the waves
with her sharp prow, and throwing on each side a continual shower of
spray; the helmsman steered her straight for the shore, and being
aware that the tide was ebbing, beached her firmly into the soft
sand, while at the same moment two companions whom he had on board
reduced the sail, hauled down the yard, and struck the mast.  They
then threw over the anchor, to keep her fast when the tide floated
her again; and stepping into the surf in their long boots which came
above the knee, they crossed the links (or downs, as they would be
called in England) and approached the observant friar.

The latter was glad to perceive that one of the trio carried an ample
basket on one arm and had a small keg under the other; and these--as
there were no smugglers in those primitive times--he fondly believed
were dutiful offerings for himself.

The three men, who came straight towards him, wore the coarse grey
doublet, cloak, and short trews then worn by the Scottish seaman,
with long fisher boots; but under this plain attire, the quick eye of
the hermit detected in each the upper rim of a gorget of fine steel,
and other indications which led him to suspect that two of them at
least, were gentlemen, who under their humble garments had each a
good coat of mail; and such was really the case, for the three
mysterious boat voyagers were none else than Robert Barton, Sir David
Falconer, and Willie Wad, who had boldly run across that morning from
Largo in a fisherboat, all undeterred by the threatening aspect of
the sky and weather, and still less by terror of the insurgents--for
each had with him his sword, dagger, and handgun.

"Good-morrow, father," said Barton, with a profound salutation; "we
presume you are the Franciscan Father of Loretto."

"Dominus vobiscum--gude-morrow, my bairns," said the Hermit, waving a
blessing to them with his fat fingers; "come ye here to pray?" he
added, eyeing with affection the basket and barrel.

"We have run in here and anchored, good father, for the double
purpose of avoiding the black squall now coming on, and if offering
up a small orison at the shrine of Loretto, where--much as I have
heard of it--I never, to my shame, have been before," said Robert
Barton.

"Come ye here, sirs, to pray alone?" asked the hermit inquisitively.

"Alone"--reiterated Falconer, puzzled by the question; "dost see
there are three of us?"

"Benedictus dominus Deus," said the friar, shrugging his shoulders,
over which his grey cowl hung, for by past experience, he had a
shrewd guess that ladies would soon arrive.

"This is the way to my hermitage--enter, and the blessings of the day
be on ye, for every day is blessed."

"The eleventh of this month, for example?" said Falconer.

"Nay, in all his wickedness, man cannot curse it; but our poor
king--are there yet no tidings of him?"

"None; and awful rumours are abroad anent his fate."

"Our pilgrimage here is dark and devious," sighed Father Fairlie,
eyeing the basket again; "yea, it is full of pitfalls, crooks, and
thorns--Benedictus dom----but take care, friend, that barrel will
slip and the ale be spilled."

"Wha tauld ye it was ale, friar?" asked the gunner, with a smirk;
"maybe it's only bilge?"

"What?" asked the Franciscan.

"Peace, Willie," said Sir David Falconer; "by my faith, priest, it is
the best of French brandy."

"Well, as I was saying, our path here in this valley of sorrow, is
indeed full of dangers and doubt.  The poor king--(brandy
indeed!--Causa nostræ lætitiæ!)--the king of the commons, alake!" and
the friar beat his breast, through which a glow had spread on hearing
with what the keg was filled.

They now approached the chapel, which was surrounded by a high stone
wall, and stood amid a grove of venerable oak trees, the branches of
which were widely spread and entwined together.  One of these bore
the name of the Weirdwoman's Aik, from what circumstance it is now
impossible to ascertain, but innumerable tales of terror were
connected with it.  There the souls of those who had committed acts
of sacrilege during their lifetime had been heard to moan, and were
seen to hover near the precincts of the holy place; there the Druids
had performed their impious rites in the days of their awful rule;
and there the gentle fairies yet danced in the bright moonlight, on
the festival of St. John, as every hermit of Loretto had averred
since the chapel was founded.

Moreover, more than one fugitive, who, unable to reach the sanctuary
of the chapel, or, mistrusting its security, had clambered up the oak
and taken shelter there, _had never more come down_; thus it was with
something of the superstitious awe incident to their time and
profession that Barton, Falconer and the gunner gazed up at the dark,
dense foliage of the weirdwoman's aik, and approached the chapel.

This venerable fane, which had been built by the _Kuldei_ (corrupted
gaelic for "the servants of God") at a time when sculpture was merely
an adjunct to masonry, was massive and plain; for though erected for
the simple form of worship those early priests performed within its
walls, it exhibited the engrafted decorations of later times.  Built
of dark grey stone, it was a simple parallelogram, destitute of
transept and of aisle.  Its door and windows were arched, and the
latter were small and placed high in the wall, having been for ages
unglazed,--the _Kuldee_ architect had wished to screen the
half-savage worshippers from the cold east wind that usually blows
from the Forth, and from the sandy links; yet much of the solemnity
and mystery peculiar to catholic edifices were imparted to it, by a
gilded figure of the Saviour on his cross, which stood above the
altar; and before it, were daily offerings of flowers.

Above this image shone the letters I.N.R.I.; below was a niche
covered by a grotesquely sculptured canopy of stone: here were the
elements, within a gilded door, around which were the following words
in old gothic letters, cut in the stone, and flourished in blue and
gold.

  Hic. Est. Servatum Corpos. ex. vergine. natum.


While the three visitors, after dipping their right hands in the font
at the chapel door, proceeded, like good catholics, to say a prayer
or two on their knees before the carved stone rail which enclosed the
altar, the hermit peeped into the basket which the gunner had left
without (giving him a wink and nod as he did so); and the reverend
father enumerated the contents with great satisfaction, muttering
between many a scrap of pious Latinity,--

"A goose, roasted--daintily, too--mater purissima!--and stuffed with
cloves and spices, doubtless; a pout pasty; three choppin flasks of
Rochelle, as I live! good;--and a mutchkin of canary; a bag of
maccaroons, with ten crowns, and five lyons--Dominus vobiscum.
Master gunner, you are a worthy soul; and your masters are generous!"

The brevity of their prayers convinced the hermit that they had not
come for religious purposes alone, and scrutinizing them he said,--

"My gude sirs, your mariners' garb fails to conceal from me that you
have iron harness below these gaberdines of frieze."

"True, father," said Barton, smiling; "we are shelled over like
partans.  But what of that?  In these desperate times men are not
wont to go abroad unarmed."

"Then who may ye be?"

"We may be a couple of rascals," said Falconer, laughing, in that
free manner acquired by soldiering; "and would be traitors, most
likely, if our blood was noble; but being of humble birth, or only
the sons of our own deserts, we are the king's liege men, and true
Scotsmen."

"Benedictus dominus," mumbled the hermit.

"This is Robert Barton, captain of the yellow caravel; this is Master
Wad, our gunner wight, and I am David Falconer; knight, and a captain
of the king's arquebusses."

The fat and full-faced hermit threw back his cowl, and taking each by
the hand with warmth, said,--

"God and St. Mary bless ye, sirs; for though your fathers were but
humble men, you are the sons of gallant deeds, and have stood nobly
by our hapless king.  Welcome to my poor cell, sirs, and to share the
gude cheer ye have brought me.  But hark--here are horses!" he added,
as the sound of hoofs was heard without.




CHAPTER LIII.

THE TRYST AT LORETTO.

  "Perfect love hath power to soften
    Cares that might our peace destroy;
  Nay, does more--transforms them often,--
    Changing sorrow into joy."--COWPER.


The hermit's eyes were filled by a cunning leer, as two ladies, each
followed by a page and female attendant, all mounted, rode down the
pathway to the chapel, and, whipping up their nags as they passed the
Weirdwoman's Aik, they alighted at the arched doorway, from which
Barton and Falconer hurried forth to meet them, full of joy and
ardour.

"Causa nostræ lætitiæ!" said the hermit.  "I kenned how it would be;
the hen-birds are come at last!"

Now, as interviews between lovers are usually very delightful to
young ladies in general, we might for their benefit narrate at great
length all that was said and done by the two fair Drummonds and the
brave loyalists who met them at Loretto; but a foreknowledge of the
dire conclusion of their tryst, has somewhat chilled us, and so we
hasten to unfold the more important part of their adventures.

"So, so; Sancta Maria!" muttered the sleek hermit, as he reckoned on
his fingers the sum given by the page of Lady Euphemia, and the
contents of a basket given him by the other.  "Such is the fashion of
prayer in these degenerate modern times, and such are the pilgrims
who usually come to pray.  Once it was not so.  A pity, too, 'tis
Friday!  That pout pie will be quite stale to-morrow.  But away with
these thoughts, for here is a pie of buttered crabs, on which I can
sup bravely, and with a clear conscience."

"By my certie, Friar Fairlie, ye might victual a sea-going ship,"
said Willie Wad.  "Here now are a cask, six flasks, and three
baskets."

"Well," responded the hermit, sulkily, "I shall have the more
wherewith to feed the hungry, the puir headsmen and lamiters, who
will be here betimes in the morning.  King William the Lion ordained
that 'Kirkmen should live honestlie by the fruits and profits of
their kirk;' even so, sir gunner, do I live by the profit and fruit
of mine.  I lippen to none, and none can say that while I have a drop
to share or a crumb to divide, the poor or the hungry left the cell
of Loretto uncared for."

"How black it grows without," said the gunner, somewhat abashed, as
he hastened to change the subject, and the chapel became dark and
gloomy, while the distant waves were heard to roll like thunder on
the lonely beach.  "Those that are at sea to-night will hae about as
mickle sleep as a weathercock may, in a close-reef-topsail breeze."

"Then do thou take up the barrel and basket, while I take these, and
come hither with me, master gunner.  And you, gentlemen," he added,
to the pages; "this stair leads to my cell.  Let us leave these four
friends to their prayers (prayers--mater purissima!), while we
arrange for them something by way of repast.  Look ye, sirs, and be
quick.  Hark! is that rain?"

Now the storm which swelled the Esk, and served to detain the
would-be murderers in the chapel on the Figgate-muir, was beginning
to descend in all its fury, and the grove of Loretto waved in the
rising wind, while the deep heavy foliage of the weirdwoman's tree
swayed mournfully in the gusty blasts.

Meanwhile, heedless of it (for perhaps they heard it not) the lovers
poured out their hearts to each other; for their cause was common,
and Barton had nothing for the ear of Euphemia that Falconer might
not hear, while he had no secret for Sybilla in which his friend had
not an interest.  It was their common safety, and the successful
issue of their fortunes on which they now consulted.

Impetuous and impulsive, with all her firmness, Euphemia gave way to
tears and wept bitterly; and the breast of Sybilla was swollen by
many a heavy sob.  Falconer left nothing unsaid to console and to
soothe her, while he gazed upon her tenderly, as if he would have
said in the words of the poet,--

  "Would I were with thee every day and hour
    Which now I spend so sadly, far from thee!
  Would that my form possessed the magic power
    To follow where my heavy heart would be.
        Whate'er thy lot by land or sea,
        Would I were there, eternally!"


"My poor blossom, how faded and how pale!" said Falconer, encircling
her by an arm.  "But take new courage, dear one, for be assured that
happier days will come.  God controlleth our destinies, and whatever
is in store for you, Sybilla, must be happiness and peace."

"I cannot, without presumption, assure myself of that.  I have
endured so much, Sir David, since that awful day at Dundee!" she
added, closing her eyes for a moment as the scene in the garden came
before her.

"Forget it, as I have forgotten it, my sweet one."

"We have been so lonely and so isolated, Euphemia and I, that--that--"

"Thou hast missed me, then, beloved Sybilla!"

"Oh yes, as a bird misses the sunshine," said she, with a bright
smile through her tears.

A mute caress was the only reply of Falconer.

"And this may be the last time we shall ever meet!" said Sybilla,
clasping her hands.

"Unless we find a safe harbour for you," said Barton.

"And found it must be, Robert," said the firmer Euphemia; "for if we
return to place ourselves under the authority of our father, and--and
the influence of our uncle, that cold and determined dean, we will be
hopelessly separated from you; for, women though we be, we dare not
refuse to wed those facile fools of Angus, Hepburn of Hailes, and
Home of Home."

Barton uttered a bitter laugh, which almost burst the braces of his
cuirass.

"What say you to this, Sybilla?" asked Falconer, with a mournful
smile.

"I have nothing to urge," said she, gently; "my mind has long been
without hope, and my heart is so crushed by sorrow that I have now
less courage than a child."

"Has the Lord Drummond forgotten altogether that you are my plighted
wife, Euphemia?" asked Barton, in a mingled tone of tenderness and
anger.

"He forgets all--everything--or despises to remember----"

"And faith!  I had almost forgotten to give thee that particular kiss
our dear Margaret sent thee."

"Stay--the friar--"

"Oh, the hermit--he is busy overhauling our baskets; well--and so
Lord Drummond forgets, eh?"

"Everything of the past; and now sees nothing but two earl's coronets
and clumps of Border spears; and hears nothing but the whispers of
envy, anger, and restless ambition----"

"Ay--and treason and rebellion."

"Hush, Bob," said the less confident Falconer; "bethink you he is
_their_ father?"

"Poor infatuated old lord," continued Barton, pursuing his own train
of thought; "in these times it may be rash to wed, when one half of
Scotland has unsheathed the sword against the other; but why may we
not bring in the hermit; here is an altar (in the kingdom we have
none holier), and we have witnesses enough--the pages, the tirewomen,
and the gunner.  Father Fairlie will splice us all in half the time a
reel would run; what say you, dear Euphemia?"

Sybilla coloured deeply at this proposal, while her sister waved her
hand in dissent and said--

"Nay, nay, Robert Barton; say no more of that, or this instant we
mount and ride westward again; shelter we must have--a sanctuary--but
not such as you would propose."

"Then for the love she bears me, my aunt, the old Claress cf Dundee,
will gladly receive you both."

"Such was our wish; but how to reach her?"

"By horse or boat--which you will.  Sauchie's soldiers guard the
Bridge of Stirling; but the king's ships keep the passage of the
river at Alloa.  At present neither mode can be thought of--to-night
at least; for we shall have a blast that will furrow up the very
bottom of the sea, and show old wrecks that lie among the weeds and
waste below; yet we shall be happy enough here, whate'er betide
without."

"I often think, dear Robert, that happiness has left us for ever!"
said the elder sister, with a sigh.

"Heaven hath its own ways, Effie, of working out its own ends; and
thus it may be all for the best of purposes that we now are beating
against a head-wind with the ebb-tide of misfortune to boot."

"Circumstances are seldom so bad, Lady Euphemia, that they might not
be worse," said Falconer, cheerfully; "we might both have been maimed
or slain outright in our last battle with the English----"

"Oh, that would have been a scene of horror!" said Sybilla, wringing
her hands.

"Horror, indeed, dearest Sybie!  When the ships crushed together till
the muzzles of their cannon rung, and the boarders were brayed to
death between them, as their sides thundered in collision."

"Yea, David," said the Captain; "many a brave fellow found a watery
grave that night, and is now lying in pickle off the Isle of May.
But let us visit the Father Hermit in his cell; after having a slice
of meat and a bicker of wine we shall be better able to arrange our
thoughts.  And hark!  By my soul, what a blast!  How the gale rises
as the spirits of the air pipe up freak gusts of wind; all at sea
must keep sure watch to-night!"

The tempestuous state of the evening prevented the chapel being
favoured by any more visitors; and the whole party (including the
four attendants of the ladies), making ten persons in all, sat on the
stone benches of the Hermit's cell, and by the light of a lamp supped
pleasantly enough; though the wind howled through the trees, and
moaned in the openings of a burial vault close by, and the boom of
the sea resounded on the beach, while the glare of the lightning
reddened at times the two narrow slits which served as windows to the
recluse's dormitory, and on the coarse glass of which the heavy
rain-drops pattered and hissed.

Willie Wad, having nothing else to do (for the ladies' attendants
seemed more occupied by the gaily-dressed pages than with him),
coiled himself up in a corner, and knowing that he would have to keep
the harbour-watch on board to-morrow night, had gone to sleep with
that sailor-like facility which defies all discomfort.

The attendants were awed into silence by the reputed holiness of the
place; the aspect of the cowled hermit, in his grey Franciscan frock,
sitting silent and reserved, as he always did before strangers; and
by the grim aspect of the cell, which was all built of bare hewn
stone, and darkened by age.

In a recess on one side lay the bed of the recluse; on the other was
a rudely sculptured niche, before which projected a little stone font
for holy water; within it was a coarse crucifix of black-thorn and a
bare skull, well polished by long use; and having inscribed on its
blanched bony temples a pious legend.




CHAPTER LIV.

THE WEIRDWOMAN'S TREE.

  "I count the man most worthless who would feed
  His wavering soul with vain delusive hope;
  To live with glory, or with glory die,
  Befits the noble."--_Sophocles._


The evening was growing into night.

The conversation at Loretto had been maintained in broken and
unconnected sentences, or in low whispers; the hermit had retrimmed
his lamp, removed the remains of the supper, and composed himself to
finish that part of his "office" which yet remained unsaid; and then
he told the maids and pages many a wonderful story of the miraculous
cures effected at the shrine: how the blind had recovered their
sight, the sick their health; how the lame had left their crutches
and wooden legs behind them; and how, when an impious boy had cast a
stone at the image of Our Lady, blood dropped from her nostrils, to
the horror of the beholders, and how that wild little boy died the
mitred Abbot of Dunfermline.

Then the gunner, who had wakened up, told many a story of a somewhat
different character: of the achievements of Andrew Wood, and of brave
old Andrew Barton; and how, in the old war waged by Scotland against
the Dutch and Portuguese, he had swept all the ocean of their ships,
from the Fortunate Isles to the swamps of the Zuiderzee; capturing,
sinking, or burning their gilded argosies and noble carracques, to
avenge the murder of some Scottish mariners on the high seas in time
of peace; and how he had barrelled up their heads in brine, and sent
some scores of them to Stirling (to the no small horror of the good
King James) as the best proof of how he was discharging his
duty,--and as the records of the Secret Council still remain to show.

The wind had gone down as the night darkened; the rain had ceased,
and now little more was heard than the roar of the billows on the
level shore; but the lovers were thoughtful and silent, for the time
of separation was approaching, and no definite plan had been resolved
on.

Amid this silence the tread of an armed man--if one might judge by
the jangling rowels of heavy military spurs--was heard to cross the
chapel floor above them; for the hermitage was in one of the numerous
vaults below the edifice.

"Gate of Heaven--a visitor!" said the hermit, closing his book, and
softly ascending the narrow stair to the chapel.  Falconer followed
with his sword half drawn, and prepared for any meeting or emergency.

The chapel was empty; there was no one there, and the door was still
closed, lest the wind might extinguish the six tapers that were
always burning before the little altar.

"This is most strange!" said the fat hermit, with an expression of
perplexity on his sleek round face.  "No man can have crossed the
chapel, and closed the door too, before we could see him."

"Some one may be without," said Falconer.

"Sancta Maria! it may be a warning of approaching evil; keep back,
Sir David, a little way, while I look without; for none dare meddle
with me."

Setting down his lamp, the hermit softly opened the chapel door,
slipped out, and looked round him; the wind had sunk into a low
moaning sough; the stars were shining through the gaps in the flying
clouds.  These gaps revealed patches of blue, occasionally; their
ragged edges were tinged by the moon; and a lurid light was visible
at the horizon.  The night was still wild-looking; but the storm was
evidently past.

On the pathway which led to the chapel, he saw a group of mounted
horsemen, one of whom was giving directions to the rest and in about
half a minute after, they separated and formed themselves in a circle
round the edifice, with the unmistakeable design of surrounding and
entrapping its unwary inmates.

The friar softly and hastily closed the door, and drew across it the
ponderous oak bar by which it was secured.

"How now, Father Hermit?" said Falconer, startled by the pale and
excited aspect of his usually rubicund visage; "what is the matter?"

"Matter!  Sancta Maria ora pro nobis--the chapel is beset!" he cried,
rushing down stairs to alarm still more the startled inmates "we are
surrounded, hemmed in on all sides!"

"By whom?" asked Falconer, furiously.

"Men----"

"The devil, friar!  I scarcely expected it would be by wild beasts."

"You may find them little better, perhaps.  They are a band of armed
horsemen, who must be in pursuit of you, and who have heard our
voices or seen the light through this small loop of glass."

"Horsemen!" said Euphemia; "they must be the mosstroopers of Lord
Home, or of Hailes.  Alas!  Robert Barton, we--_we_ have lured you to
this destruction!"

"Ora pro nobis," mumbled the bewildered hermit, looking upward
imploringly; "alack--is this a time for wretched men to wage a strife
amongst themselves, when the elements are at war with us all?"

"Away, away, dearest David," said Sybilla, throwing herself into the
arms of Falconer; "reach your boat, and trust to the waves rather
than to them.  They dare not harm _us_--but you and Robert
Barton--oh, Mother above, have mercy on us!"

At that moment, the two female attendants unwisely began to utter
noisy cries of terror, while the startled pages, though but boys,
grasped their poniards; then a knocking, like thunder, shook the
chapel door, and a fierce laugh was heard without the little painted
window of the cell, at which Sybilla saw a grim and bearded face
appear, with its eyes glittering under the peak of an iron morion;
for there stood Borthwick, with his brazen visage, and heart as hard
as steel.

"Be calm," said Barton--"be silent all," he added, with a voice of
authority; "take courage, and remember that this is a sanctuary--a
holy place."

"You should have remembered that before making it the scene of
amorous assignations and unholy dalliance," said the hermit, with
something of anger.

"Pardon us," said Barton; "yet it is not the less a sanctuary."

"But, I fear me, these masterful limmers would violate the blessed
sepulchre itself," replied the friar, bitterly, as he hastened to
conceal the barrel, the two baskets, and the six flasks, in the niche
beyond the crucifix and skull.

"Violate it! dost thou think so?" asked Barton, drawing his sword.

At that instant, again the thundering knocks rang on the chapel door,
and shouts were heard.

"A Home! a Home!"

"Dost think they will commit sacrilege?"

"What dare they not do?  Hear ye not they are Homes?"

"True--true," said Falconer, biting his nether lip; "hark to the
slogan of the Border-men."

"Ay," quoth Master Wad; "but mony a gay galley saileth under fause
colours; mony a muffled man, and mony a lord baron when his helmet is
closed, if bound on a deed of ill, crieth the slogan of another house
than his own, to mislead the people."

"A shrewd suggestion, Willie; but no other men have such an interest
in the shortening of our lives as Hepburn of Hailes and----"

"_Kepe tryste!_" cried a voice without.

"That is the cry of Hailes--so both are there!" said Falconer, with
fiery joy.

"'Sdeath," said Home; "open, false priest!  Is the chapel of Our
Blessed Lady a place for these cushat doves to coo and bill in?  By
Saint Ringan, Father Hermit, the Lord Abbot of Dunfermline and the
Archbishop of St. Andrew's shall know of this, and dearly shall it
cost thee!"

"Now we know our enemies," said Falconer, as he and Barton exchanged
a dark glance of intelligence; "off with these vile disguises,
Robert," he added, throwing aside his grey gaberdine and short trews,
below which appeared a handsome coat of mail; "If we must die, let us
do so like the men we are, not garbed like guisards on the night of
Hogmenai."

"Oh, Father Hermit--oh! is there, is there no avenue--no mode of
escape for them?" said Euphemia, while pale and trembling she clung
with her white hands to the friar's coarse grey cassock.

"None--none; there is a passage through the burial vault, towards the
links--"

"And that--and that--"

"Is guarded;--hark how they hammer at it now."

"Saint Mary and Saint John! then the place is surrounded,"

"On every side."

The wretched sisters wrung their hands in an ecstasy of grief; while
Wad began to tighten his waistbelt, draw his bonnet over his brow,
and spit with terrible deliberation into the palms of his brown
hands, as the preliminaries of attempting something desperate.

"We have but one way," said Falconer.

"And that?" asked Barton.

"Is to sally out and die boldly," said he, as he pressed his lip to
Sybilla's cold white cheek.

"To climb the wall of the precincts is impossible," said the priest:
"it is ten feet high, and its gate is guarded by eight spearmen at
least, I could reckon their lance-heads when glittering in the
starlight."

"Right, and we are but three men on foot," said Barton.

"If we could but slip out and reach one of these trees," said the
gunner, "there we might sit perched up and undiscovered till the
burgesses of Musselburgh were roused with their axes and staves."

"St. Mary forgive me for engaging in this matter; but it is most just
to defend the innocent, to punish the sacrilegious, and prevent the
effusion of Christian blood," said the poor hermit, with a sigh of
anger, as he brought up from his cell the cask of brandy, and staved
in the head thereof by one blow of his sturdy hand.  "Now, friend
gunner, lend me a match from that pistolette of thine, and while I
souse the leading varlets in burning liquor, do you three take
shelter in the weirdwoman's tree, for the gate beyond is guarded.
Among its branches you will be safe from molestation, and perhaps
from discovery."

"Good--thou counsellest bravely," said Barton; and all the while the
incessant din continued at the door without.

The three shipmates stood ready, with their swords and daggers drawn;
the hermit dipped the flaming match into the brandy, from which the
fire arose in red and bluish lambent light.  The ladies shrunk back
towards the altar-rail, while Wad flung open the chapel door.  Then,
as four or five armed men rushed forward to enter,--

"Malediction!" cried the hermit, and dashed the flaming spirit full
into their faces; while Barton, Falconer, and Wad charged them sword
in hand, and broke through at the same moment.  Some of the
assailants had the aventayles of their helmets shut, thus the hot
spirit passed through the eyelet-holes, and half or wholly blinded
them for the time.  There was a momentary shock--a clashing of
blades, and emission of sparks, as two men were hurled to the earth,
and one run through the body by our fugitives, who, being well aware
that the outer gate of the precincts was securely guarded, hastened
to the weirdwoman's tree, and with no other footing on its rough and
gnarled bark than such as desperation and the fierce energy of the
moment supplied, they clambered up, all heavily accoutred as they
were.  Wad was first secure among the branches, and Barton next.
Less accustomed to climbing and wholly unused to "going aloft," poor
Falconer, but for the assistance lent by their proffered hands, would
have failed to attain the same secure elevation, and must infallibly
have been sacrificed; but soon they all three clambered up together
among the damp leaves, and in the heart of the thick dark foliage
attained a perch where even spearmen on horseback would fail to reach
them.

"Art thou secure and firmly anchored, friend David?" asked Barton, in
a whisper.

"Yes, I am astride a great branch here, like a French juggler on a
_cheval-de-bois_," said he, laughing.

"Hush!--here come those runions now, so let us take to our hand-guns,
and make service against them.  My flask--I have left it in the
chapel!  Falconer, I trust thine is at thy belt?"

"Nay, I unstrapped it at supper; but perhaps Willie Wad----"

An imprecation from the gunner now increased their alarm.

"God's mercy!" said Barton; "is thine missing too?"

"No, sir; but I have only three charges of powder in it."

"Well, these are three men's lives.  Charge home, Willie, and fire
surely, for here they come."

In the fitful moonlight, Falconer being the last, had been seen to
scramble up the oak; and now, with drawn sword and brandished lance,
Home, Hailes, Borthwick, and even honest Blackcastle, whom the
infectious spirit of mischief had seized, and who was still smarting
from the burning brandy, some of which had been dashed in his face,
with all the rest of their party, surrounded the stem of the threat
tree, with threats, jibes, and cries of anger and defiance.

"Ha, ha!" laughed Hailes; "so the cock-pigeons, whose cooing we
spoiled, are all roosted in this tree."

"Unwind me your hand-guns, some of ye, sirs," said Home; "try a shot
ere they take wing."

"Blithely, though I wad rather hae ane gude straik wi' a Jethart
staff than sax shots wi' thae _war-cracks_," said a grim mosstrooper,
who gave his weapon the local name by which these primitive firearms
were then known.

This simple gun, which first made its appearance in Scotland about
1450, in the time of James II., who received it from the Italians,
was at first a mere iron tube, with little trunnions at its sides.
By these it was secured to a wooden stock.  The touch-hole was first
on the top; but as the priming was liable to fall off, or be blown
away, the vent was transferred to the right side, where a pan held
the powder, and over it was a cover which opened on a pivot: such was
the first germ of our modern musket.

Two or three horsemen who were furnished with these then formidable
weapons, opened their pans, and levelling at the heart of the tree
above their heads, applied the matches.  There was a triple blaze--a
simultaneous report, and three bullets whistled harmlessly through
the foliage of the oak, cutting its leaves, and whitening the
branches, but far apart from the three fugitives; for the troopers
fired unsteadily, and at random.

The night was still dark; the moon glinted uncertainly at times, and
the foliage was dense and thick.

"Again, and again," said Home; "fire while there is a charge in your
flasks or a ball in your bags; and I will give ten crowns to the
first who brings down his bird like a capercailzie."

At that moment there was a flash in the heart of the black foliage; a
ball grazed Lord Home's shoulder and killed a mosstrooper beside him.
The man's morion and iron jack rang heavily as he fell to the ground,
and almost without a cry; for Wad's aim was a sure one.

"Fire at the spot that flash came from," cried Lord Hailes; "and I
swear by St. Serf's ram, and St. Anthony's pig, to add twenty crowns
to thine, Home, as the guerdon of our best gunner."

"'Tis said that some have gone up this tree and never more come
town," said Blackcastle.

"Well, it would matter little if it happens again in the present
instance," said Borthwick, on seeing how the superstitious
mosstroopers shrunk back at this remark; "but we shall soon bring
them down, I warrant.  Let the chapel door, however, be well guarded,
lest the hermit or his ladies rouse on us the burgesses of
Musselburgh, which their tongues will assuredly do, if this unwonted
firing doth not."

Again three bullets were fired into the tree, and as the flashes
broke from the iron muzzles of the hand-guns, the murderers--for such
they were by intention--could see each other's brown visages, wiry
beards, and rusty morions, and the green leaves and rough bark of the
enchanted oak,--but for an instant only.

These three balls were as harmless as their predecessors; and while
the slow process of loading from a flask, putting in wadding,
bullets, and priming, was resumed, a shot came from the tree, and
with a cry of agony another borderer fell at the side of Lord Home.

"On my soul, thou'st the cry of a screech-owl!  Where the devil art
thou hurt, fellow?" asked the lord, with considerably less of
sympathy than anger in his tone.

"In the left cuit.  Oh, my lord, I shall never, never ride again, and
wha will gie me meat and fee?"

"Ha, ha!" laughed Wad from his perch; "I have pinked this one on the
larboard side."

"He'll have a heel to port for the remainder of his days," said
Barton; "fire again, Willie."

"What if yonder white figure by the stream was the weirdwoman, and
_not_ the ghost of the warder's wife?" suggested Blackcastle.

"Gomeral!" cried Home, furiously; "I care not if she were the devil,
and----"

Wad's last shot, for (as the reader is aware) he had unhappily but
_three_, grazed the cheek-plate of the noble's helmet, and so
discomposed him that he forgot what he meant to say; but now doubly
alarmed by their superstitious fears, and by finding themselves
exposed, under an increasing moonlight, to the deadly aim of those
they could not see, the two lords and their followers withdrew a
little to consult on their future measures.

Meanwhile those who had been left within the chapel heard the uproar
without, and the reports of the hand-guns, which filled their hearts
with terror; for these weapons were little known in Scotland, and
were deemed more deadly in effect than they really were.

"Let us kindle a fire round the tree," said Borthwick, whose wits
were sharpened by the prospect of gaining thirty crowns; "this will
soon bring them all down among fire and smoke."

"Good!"

"Admirable!" said the lords; "but where is the fuel?"

"Here; this shed, wherein this rogue of a hermit stables his
visitors' horses, will provide us; alight, my Annandale thieves--off
with your steel gloves, and unroof the stable," said Borthwick,
setting the example; "pile sticks and straw, roof and rafters, round
the stem, and throw in your lighted matches--quick!"

The little edifice to which he referred adjoined the chapel, and
meant to receive the horses of pilgrims and visitors.  It was heavily
roofed with warm thatch, which was quite dry below the coating of
emerald-green moss which covered it.  Well used to such work, the
strong mosstroopers in two minutes tore down the rafters, broke up
the hack, manger, and one or two old corn casks that lay in the
stalls, and piled them with all the straw round the stem of the oak
tree; and then sprinkling powder over all, threw in their lighted
matches.

The flame smouldered a little, and then shot up and licked the
thick-seamed bark of the ancient tree.

"Bring more fuel," cried Hailes, "even though we tear down the
provost's house for it; quick, my bold mosstroopers, so ready of wit
and stout of heart."

Two little stacks, one of heather, from which the poor hermit made up
his bed, and another of peats, which supplied him with fuel, and both
of which, like everything else he had, were the gift of visitors,
were torn down and added to the pile, with all the fallen branches
and green saplings that could be collected; and now the wavering fire
began to ascend and blaze in a fiery circle, twisting itself into a
column around the stem of the strong oak tree.

The forky flames shot high and higher among the foliage, hissing
against the wet branches, and scorching off those that were crisped
and dry; the old knots and gnarls began to crack and burn; and as the
sheet of fire deepened and gathered strength, it became evident that
the three lurkers, even if they failed to be suffocated, would soon
be compelled by the heat to fall on the spears of those who watched
and waited below, while others were constantly employed in seeking
the means necessary to maintain and augment the fire!

"It burns well," said Borthwick, with grim complacency, while poking
it up with his swordblade.

"These varlets have given us more trouble than their miserable lives
can ever atone for," said Hailes, in an undertone.

"Lives! on my soul, they seem to have as many each as a cat," replied
Home.

"With the power of making the most of each of them."

"On my faith, were not my pride and obstinacy enlisted in this cause,
I would counsel that we should wear the willow in our bonnets,
Hailes, and bequeath these Drummond dames to their salt-water lovers,
with the devil's benison on their bridal."

"Let us first see each gay lemane with his head under his arm.
Halloa, fellows, are not yet coming down?  By my soul, ye must be
birselled in your iron coats like winter apples or roasted crabs by
this time!"

The flames had now reached the middle of the tree, and in their blaze
the whole band could see each others' flushed faces and fiery eyes;
their rusty accoutrements and glittering weapons; and their two
comrades stretched on the ground, one with upturned eye and jaw
relaxed, but placid and still, like all who die by gunshot wounds;
the other still bleeding and writhing in pain.  On one side rose the
façade of the ancient chapel with its low-browed Roman doorway and
deep-sunk windows, on the other were the sturdy stems and freakish
branches of the patriarchal tree which shaded its time-worn walls.

Up and farther upward shot the flames, and in half-an-hour every
leaf, save those upon the extremity of the branches, was gone; the
whole foliage had been scorched off; the large knotty limbs were
blackened and burned, or the smaller entirely consumed; the whole of
that magnificent oak was divested of bark, cracked, calcined, and
half consumed by fire.

Still the three prisoners had neither cried once for mercy, nor
fallen down by being overcome by heat or exhaustion; and _now_, those
who thirsted for their blood below, began to look rather blankly in
each others' faces, while fear and wonder grew together in their
hearts.

The flames around its mighty stem sunk low, and died away as morning
brightened in the east; and there stood the giant tree, with its
trunk, nearly nine feet in diameter, the bare and blackened ruin of
its former self--a smoking and sable skeleton; but there was no
trace, not even a vestige of the fugitives!

It was impossible that the fire could have consumed them and their
apparel too.

It was equally impossible that they could have descended and escaped
through the flames, for their intended destroyers stood around them
in a circle.

"By St. Mary, there hath been magic or a miracle at work here!" said
Hailes, on being convinced that, beyond a doubt, the _three_ had
vanished from their lofty perch.

"'Tis said that some who have ascended this tree did never more come
down," said Home.

"May the Blessed Virgin not have borne them away to punish us for
violating the sanctity of Loretto," said the superstitious Laird of
Blackcastle, in a low voice.

"May not the devil or the weird woman have done the same thing?"
asked Borthwick, scoffingly, with a scowl in his eye.

"Peace," said Hailes, with an irrepressible shudder, caused either by
fear or the chill morning air; "I have heard of strange things for
good or evil happening here," he added, putting a foot in his stirrup
to remount; "and _now_ I am not ashamed to say that I repent me
sorely of following those rascals into consecrated ground; so let us
to horse and begone, lest the burgesses of the honest town betake
them to axe and stave to punish this raid of ours before we cross the
Esk again; for _they_ will not thole the sin, though our gentler Lady
of Loretto may."




CHAPTER LV.

THE ESCAPE.

  "Oh shut, O bar the castle-gate!
    Oh shut the chamber-door!
  No faithful turtle quits her mate,
    I'll quit my love no more."--ELLIOT OF MINTO.


In no way satisfied by the result of their expedition, the two nobles
and their followers galloped from Loretto, and re-passed the Bridge
of Musselburgh just in time to avoid the wrath of the burghers, who
had displayed their standard with its _three mussels_ and the proud
motto, "Honesto," and were preparing to punish severely the sacrilege
of the night; but Borthwick, as his companions retreated across the
bridge of the Esk, locked the iron gate on the western side, and
tauntingly, in sight of all their pursuers, flung the key "to the
Kelpie's keeping" in the swollen river, the deep and rapid torrent of
which barred all passage; and thus in safety, the whole band--two
excepted, who were afterwards hanged at Musselburgh Cross--"the quick
and the dead"--reached the King's Wark at Leith, the headquarters of
the insurgent lords.

"Mater purissima!" exclaimed Father Fairlie, as well he might, on
leaving his chapel door next morning, and seeing the _débris_ of the
operations we have just described; the roofless stable; the rifled
stacks; the torn shrubbery; the scorched sward; the black skeleton of
the burned oak, and the two men who lay upon the ground in their
armour, one dead and the other nearly so.

"Heaven will assuredly punish this sacrilege," said Euphemia to
Sybilla, as a smile of triumph struggled with the fear and sorrow
impressed upon her pale face by the events of the past night.  "Bring
forth our horses," she added to the pages, "and let us also begone,
for I fear me, holy friar, you will deem your cell but little
favoured by the presence of those who have been the innocent, though
certainly the primary cause of this atrocious outrage and bloodshed.
In our purses, which we have left upon the altar, you will, I hope,
find more than enough to repay you for all you have suffered or lost;
and be assured we will never forget you."

The friar did not reply.

Poor man--he was astounded by the whole affair; and crossing his
hands upon his paunch, rolled his round eyes, and continued to mutter
involuntarily, "Benedictus Dominus deus!" and other scraps from the
canticle of Zachary, while the pages prepared the horses in haste;
and with all speed the ladies departed, expressing the most lively
and heartfelt gratitude to the hermit, who retired to begin his daily
"office," and once more investigate the contents of the two baskets
and six flasks.

"But the barrel, alas!" said he, with a sigh of anger, though its
contents had been spent or spilt in furthering the escape of Barton,
Falconer, and their faithful follower from the barbarous fate to
which this luckless tryst had lured them; "the brandy--the
barrel--_miserere nostri_--'tis lost!"

Their disappearance was brought about in the following manner:--

When our three fugitives found that their ammunition was
expended--that day was breaking, and yet there came no signs of
rescue--that the tree remained environed by armed men on every
side--and that the fire which begirt it was mounting up the stem,
despair and horror began to seize their hearts, and, creeping close
together in the dark among the rising smoke and withering foliage,
they were about to adopt the proposal of Robert Barton--that the
whole three of them should leap down, sword in hand, on three
different sides, and die under the steel of these vindictive enemies,
if they could not baffle or surmount them, when, lo! to their
astonishment, they heard a fourth voice beside them, and the bald
head of the hermit appeared close by, projecting from a hole in the
enormous trunk of the tree, which by age was quite hollow, and by
decay had become a mere wooden tube.

"Mater purissima," said he; "quick, my bairns, quick! descend this
way, while there is yet time."

"Descend--but to where?  The smoke hath made me blind as a bat," said
Barton; "but how, in the name of Saint or Satan, came you here, most
reverend Father?"

"Up the hollow trunk of this old oak, with which a stair below
communicates," replied the priest, whose voice was almost lost amid
the crackling of the flames; "this has proved a hiding-place to more
than one in time of broil and trouble; but descend, and, in the name
of Our Lady, quickly?  Give me thy hand--thy foot, I mean--place it
_here_, so--this is the first step hollowed in the trunk--now thy
hand, so--this is the next, and thus we descend; one of my
predecessors constructed this stair, that he might say his prayers on
the tree-top, in imitation of St. Simon Stock, who lived in a tree in
Kent;--down--down--yet, carefully now."

The friar disappeared and Barton and Falconer followed; but the
latter, missing a footstep, fell heavily to the bottom, and found
himself underground, on the soft, damp mould of the burial vault.

Dumbfoundered by the sudden and mysterious disappearance of his
companions, poor Willie Wad paused for a moment in great irresolution.

"Avast, Sir David--belay there," cried he; "hallo, gude Father
Fairlie, in the name o' Our Leddy, dinna leave me here in stays!
O-ho--I see how it is!" he added.  Ignorant of the mode of descent,
and not wishing exactly to drop into the dark hole below, he resolved
to "go down by the run."  After reflecting for a moment, Willie
pulled out of the pouch which has been so often already referred to,
a few fathoms of what a seaman is seldom without--stout cord, and
looping it round a branch, lowered himself into the hole, from the
bottom of which he heard Captain Barton anxiously shouting, and
describing the mode of descent.

While the fat, pursy friar was clambering slowly and laboriously up
to his assistance, he was unexpectedly met by the broad end of the
short, squat gunner, who, as the cord slid through his hands,
descended upon his shaven crown with all the force of a steam-hammer
or a battering ram, and shot him at once to the bottom; nearly ending
there his orisons and feasts of every kind, spiritual and temporal.

"O Mater castissima, you have slain me!" he cried, as he rose with
difficulty from the floor of the vault; "_Miserere nostri Domine!_"

"Mercy on us!" said the startled gunner; "look ye, shipmate--holy
Father, I mean--"

"Heaven send that no more pilgrims such as you come here," said the
hermit, peevishly; "and now, for your own sakes at least, begone; I
shall be blessed by the sight of your backs."

"May we not see the ladies?"

"Impossible, Sir David; they are above in the chapel, at some
distance, for this is but an old burial-vault, where the lairds of
Fawsyde lie.  Ye have suffered enough for cooing and billing here,
instead of confessing and praying; so get ye gone, sirs, in the Holy
Virgin's name,--away, by yonder outlet, which will take you to the
beach; away, ere worse come upon you."

"Friar, may we not take them with us?" asked Sir David Falconer.

"Four women in an open boat--and in this weather?" exclaimed the
priest, polishing his bald crown with his wide sleeve, and giving the
penitent gunner a glance of very mingled cast.

"True--true," said Barton; "it is impossible."

"With a fresh breeze perhaps coming on," said the gunner, rubbing the
nether end of his galligaskins.

"Heaven knoweth I would be the last man to keep fond hearts asunder;
but, once again, I implore--nay, I command you to begone, before your
blood desecrates these holy walls for ever!"

After this, farther parley was useless, and through a suite of
vaults--only one of which now remains--they were led by the friar for
about forty yards, till he reached a little door, which on the
outside was half buried by drifted sand.  He opened it, and they soon
found themselves beyond the precincts, and free.

"Gude be thankit, we are fairly under way," said Willie Wad; "may I
drink bilge, if such a hellicate job was ever mine before!  Noo,
sirs, let us haul off on the larboard tack and reach our boat."

They hurried across the sandy knolls and broomy hollows of the links
and reached their boat by wading to her through the full tide.
Taking the kedge on board, they stepped the mast, half hoisted the
lugsail, and betaking them to their oars, bore away into the river
just as the dawn began to streak the eastern sea with light.  But
still the wind was blowing hard.

"I have but one sorrow," said Barton, as he relaxed the braces of his
armour and bent to the oar; "we have left our ladies in their
hands--but by Tantony's bell, they have had a hard fight for them!"

"If I thought Sybilla's chances of happiness were greater with the
powerful Lord of Hailes, than with the king's poor arquebussier, by
my word, Barton, I would yield her to him, though my heart should
break in doing so."

"Wherefore and why so benevolent?"

"Because it would best prove the strength and purity of my love for
her to yield her up, rather than by prosecuting my humbler suit to
the injury of her worldly interest and commoditie--thus throwing my
own happiness overboard to secure hers."

"Hailes could neither secure her happiness nor value your sacrifice.
You heard his sentiments under that flaming oak?" said Barton.

"Alas!  I cannot blame Lord Drummond for his hostility to me.  Unlike
Hailes, I cannot offer poor Sybilla the rank, the power, the splendid
gifts of feudal fortune possessed by the House of the Hepburns."

"Thou canst give her far more--a brave and honest heart, and a name
unstained by crime and _treason_.  Of that few Scottish noble names
are free!  Ouf--there was a mouthful of salt water!  Willie, mind ye
the tiller, my lad."

The chapel wherein the events of this chapter occurred was demolished
at the Reformation, and no vestige of it now remains save the
name--Loretto,--and a little cell, which measures about twelve feet
by ten.  Herein were found a number of skulls lately.

From the materials of the edifice, the present Tolbooth of
Musselburgh was built in 1590, during the reign of James VI.; and for
this signal act of sacrilege, the burgesses of the "Honest Town" were
regularly excommunicated annually, by bell, book, and candle, at
Rome, until within the last few years, when his holiness perhaps grew
tired of it.




CHAPTER LVI.

THE UNICORN LOOSE.

  _Macduff_.  "Stands Scotland where it did?
  _Rosse_.    Alas, poor country;
              Almost afraid to know itself!  It cannot
              Be call'd our mother, but our grave."--_Macbeth_,


The Lords still remained at Leith, where they took all measures and
precautions necessary to strengthen their power and increase their
forces, in case the missing king should appear at the head of the
Highland clans, or perhaps a foreign army, to vindicate his rights
and those of Scotland; for they still remembered the threats uttered
by the Mareschal de Concressault in the Castle of Callender; but an
end was put to all their arrangements and surmises by the discovery
of James's body, which was found by the sleuth bratches of the old
Steward of Menteith when tracking some robbers through the Torwood,
all gashed and bloody, blanched and soiled by a week's exposure in a
field-ditch near Beaton's mill on the Bannock; and now a thrill of
sorrow went over all the land, for even the most barbarous of that
nobility who have ever been so false, so treacherous, and so base to
Scotland--who have usually been the first to abandon her on the
field, and assuredly not the last to betray her in the cabinet--had
not contemplated an issue so terrible!

The young prince was filled with horror and remorse, which even the
tidings of Lady Margaret's safety with the Admiral could not
alleviate: for now he recalled with the keenest sorrow, how bitterly
he had accused his poor father of abducting her, and how, led away by
passion and despair, he had permitted himself to be the tool, the
dupe, and the plaything of the turbulent and ambitious noblesse.

From that hour he began to shun them, and to seek for his father's
oldest and most faithful friends.  The first he thought of was the
trusty Laird of Largo, to whom he despatched the Snowdon Herald and
Unicorn Pursuivant, announcing the awful intelligence of his royal
father's murder (the news of which was already pretty well known at
the court of England), and requiring his presence at Leith.  Then
full of rage and sorrow the Admiral put out of Largo Bay, and with
all his ships and prisoners, stood with all sail set up the river,
and anchored off the seaport of the capital, where all the vessels in
the harbour and roadstead, showed their ensigns half hoisted--the
blue Scottish flag with its white saltier, which is the groundwork of
the modern Union Jack; and which is still retained unchanged by the
Old Shipping Company of Leith.

The same flag was hoisted on the English prizes, one of which, say
the Admiralty records, as she came abreast of the town, had her keel
knocked away upon the Gunnel.  The latter is a dangerous sunken rock,
which is yet unmarked by a buoy, though it has only eight feet of
water over it at ebb tide.

In the large hall of Barton's house at Leith, on a bright and sunny
morning, the prince was again seated at the table, where a grave and
melancholy council had just been held on what should _now_ be done to
heal the dissensions which were likely to break out anew, as a cry
"for vengeance on the king's murderers" was going throughout the
land.  The council had been broken up without a decision being found.
The prince was pale, sad-eyed, and downcast, and left almost alone:
for in the deep recesses of the hall windows, Angus, Home, Hailes,
the Heritable Forester of Drum, and others, with many lords of the
noble faction, were conversing, or gazing dreamily at sunlit river,
and the ships which caine to anchor near the shore.

Sir Patrick Gray of Kyneff had retired to the Castle of Broughty; Sir
James Shaw of Sauchie had repaired to his fortress of Stirling, and
Sir William Stirling of the Keir, animated by the same wisdom and
prudence, had retreated to some fastness in the Highlands of
Perthshire; while their worthy compatriot, Hew Borthwick--though as
yet unsuspected and unknown--had concealed himself in Berwick, which
was then garrisoned by English troops, and had been so since its
betrayal by Alexander Duke of Albany, who was then an exile in France.

Above the prince's chair was a coat of the royal arms, in which the
chains of the unicorns were represented _loose_, as we may still see
them.

Lately by the voice of Heralds, by the sound of trumpets and by the
boom of brass artillery, he had been proclaimed at the crosses of all
the adjacent burghs, King of Scotland and the Isles, by the title of
James IV.; but he felt as if a curse had come with it upon him, for
the crown had been drenched in the blood of his father.

"Betouch us, too!" said old Lord Drummond, to whom Home and Hailes
related the mysterious disappearance of the three fugitives from the
tree.  "Well, it matters not whether the spirits of the air, the
earth, the gude wichts, or the weirdwoman herself hath made away with
them; they are gone, and St. Mary be praised, there is an end of them
now.  But please you, my good lords, bruit not abroad this scandalous
tryst of my runagate daughters."

"I shall speak with the Abbot of Dunfermline anent this runion of a
hermit, however," said Home, angrily; "by Heaven I will!"

"The friar; yes, we shall have him unfrocked for abetting
assignations under the colour of pilgrimages, and bringing scandal
upon holy places," added Hailes, as he joined Lord Lyle and turned to
another window to watch the ships of Wood.

Observing his daughter Sybilla similarly engaged, with her pale cheek
resting on her hand, Lord Drummond approached her, with his brows
knit, and said in a low voice,--

"Art prepared now, Sybie, to seek my blessing, and to win forgiveness
for this most shameful visit to Loretto, by wedding at once this gay
young Lord, whose Earl's patent hath all but passed the seals?"

"Oh father, I never could love him."

"Why not? hath he not as many legs and arms, eyes and ears as other
men--and what more dost thou want--eh?"

"Oh, Mother Mary!" sighed Lady Sybilla, "teach me what to say."

"A truce to prayers," said the old Lord, spitefully, while his eyes
kindled; "prayers, indeed! had we not enough of that ware at Loretto?"

"I have ever striven to please you, dear father,--to be dutiful and
kind--but--but----"

"But me no _buts_--thou silly giglet."

"Father, I am your child----"

"I hope so, though of late I've had my doubts of it.  Well, then, as
my child thou art bound to obey me."

"But surely not in all things?" said Sybilla, whoso tears fell fast.

"In all things!" reiterated this despotic old baron, who had the
power of life and death, pit and gallows, over all in Strathearn, and
yearly took by force the best horse and fattest cow from every tenant
there as a herezeld: "if the greatest of my vassals is bound to obey
me to the death--yea, to obey or swing on the nearest branch,--how
much more ought thou and Euphemia, who are my own daughters?  A curse
on the hour such brittle ware as daughters came into the house of
Drummond!"

"I have no desire to wed," said Sybilla, making a violent effort to
control her tears, for many eyes were upon her, "none! let me abide
with you, dearest father, and little Elizabeth and Beatrix, in bonnie
Strathearn; for I have no wish to leave your hearth and home; I have
no wish for wealth, and no desire for rank."

"Rank--what do you mean by rank?  _My_ daughters require not _that_,"
said the old chief, clanking his enormous spurs on the floor.

"But if you think over-many of us are growing up to woman's estate,
let me retire into a convent, where, by teaching others to embroider,
to illuminate, and to write, I may maintain myself with utility; hear
me, dearest father!"

"A convent, Sybie?"

"Yes--yes; there are the Grey Sisters at Dundee, all of whom are
pious, good, and kind, and know me well."

"Enough, thou cunning minx, enough! the superior of those Claresses
is aunt to Robert Barton, the skipper's son; nay, I see how the wind
sets, as _he_ would say.  'Tis a conspiracy against me," added the
old lord, furiously; "but let all plotters _gang warily_, for by the
arm of St. Fillan I'll have a deep revenge and a sure one!  But hush
now, lassie, for here cometh the Admiral Wood and his English
prisoners, with Margaret--my daughter Margaret, as I am a living man!"

"And two spruce English damsels," said Hailes, who like Home was
astonished on beholding Falconer and Barton, both of whom accompanied
the admiral.

"On my soul, this Laird of Largo hath no small assurance, to bring
all this rabble of fellows into the prince's presence," said the Earl
of Angus, knitting his brows as he surveyed the numerous group
surrounding Sir Andrew Wood, whose friends were all in armour, and
who had brought with him Willie Wad and Cuddie Clewline, his
coxswain; while Edmund Howard, conspicuous by his noble bearing and
rich costume, was followed by John o'Lynne, Dick Selby, his tall
gunner, and the principal officers of the captured ships; all of whom
were without swords or armour, and were graciously received by the
sad and thoughtful prince--now James IV.,--after he had sprung
forward, and heedless of the assembled crowd, knelt down with that
enthusiastic gallantry for which he was so celebrated, and kissed
both the hands of Lady Margaret Drummond.  He then placed her by his
side, where her sisters hung around her neck.

James then asked Howard with something of sternness, "how she came to
be found on board of the _Harry_, and why, in time of truce, such war
was levied on the Scottish people?"

Howard, who had beheld this meeting with a keen emotion that amounted
almost to agony, replied with grave but respectful firmness:

"I can assure your majesty, that in the matter of having this noble
dame on board my ship I shall answer no questions, and though you
should tear me limb from limb, I would rather die than betray the
secrets of my royal master!"

"Hah--is it so? then here, as usual, have been at work dark England's
cursed gold and Scotland's ready treason," said the young king,
striking his spurred heel on the floor; "but a time shall come for
unravelling all this!  Welcome, brave Andrew Wood, my dear dead
father's firmest friend; his first and last, his noblest and most
true!"

A tear came zigzag down the furrows of the old mariner's face as the
young monarch spoke, and he answered in a broken voice,--

"I have ever striven to do my duty to Scotland and her king, like a
sailor and a man, and so God has blessed and prospered me.  Weel,
weel, it's a' owre noo; our gude king is, I doubt not, safely moored
in a blessed anchorage, and lest he may not lie in the smoothest
riding, I will lay out a thousand crowns in masses for his soul in
Largo Kirk and at Mary's Altar in Leith, just to make his anchor
hold.  Let us hope that the evil currents, the rocks and shoals he
came through in life will all be taken into account aloft, when he
comes to reckon up his variation and leeway, and shall secure him
everlasting peace in the blessed latitudes above; for a braver or a
better man never faced wind or water, shot or steel!  Well fare thy
soul, King James; in thee puir auld Andrew Wood has lost a kind and
faithful master, such as he never more may see!"

"This may savour more of truth than politeness to his successor,"
said the haughty Angus, who disliked this outburst of feeling, which
quite unmanned James IV.; "but I say welcome to thee from battle,
stout Largo, and there is my hand to thee in all amity and
friendship."

The giant earl drew off his glove, and they shook hands; the noble
with an air of courtly condescension, and the seaman with blunt
cordiality.

Many now expressed the pleasure it gave them to see the admiral once
more in safety, but he received their advances with coolness and
evident distrust.

"I am safe and sound and well, thank Heaven, my lords and gentles,"
said he, "and have neither had a hole punched in my ribs, nor a butt
nor bolt started; but here I bring your majesty four gallant ships
and much warlike gear, all marked with the broad arrow of England;"
(the badge of the Edwards was then, as now, a government mark.)
"Would that I could have laid their white colours at the feet of that
brave monarch over whose devoted head the stormy sea of this world
has closed for ever!"

After a few words with Barton, Falconer, John o'Lynne, and others,
the young monarch, for whom "woman's face was never formed in vain,"
suddenly perceived Rose and Cicely, and desired them to approach.  As
the old admiral led them both forward trembling and blushing, to a
close observer it would have been evident how nervously Cuddie
Clewline and Willie Wad fumbled each with his ruff and waistbelt,
twirled his bonnet, and hitched up his short wide trews, or chewed
the ropeyarn lanyard of his jockteleg, _i.e._, clasp-knife.

"And so, my pretty damsels," said James IV., "you also were found on
board this great ship, the _Harry_?"

"They were my attendants," said Margaret, "and most kind and faithful
have they been to me."

"What is thy father in his own country, maiden?" James asked of
Rose,--a shade coming over his face as he thought of his own sire.
But poor Rose blushed and hesitated, for she had never stood in such
a presence before; and a simple English girl of those days had about
as much conception of what like a Scottish king might be as of the
Khan of Tartary;--indeed, the unlettered English are not very clear
in their ideas of Scotland yet, for two acts of the British
parliament have recently described it as an _island_.

"Speak, my pretty one; and be not alarmed," said the handsome young
king.

"My father is Abel Eyre, a fishmonger in the Knight-Rider-street,"
said she, gathering courage at the gentle voice of James; "my mother
is the sister of Peter Puddle, who keepeth a wharf westward of
Baynard Castle, upon Thames; so please you.  Alas!" she continued,
still keeping her eyes and their long dark lashes downcast; "I know
not how to see them all again; I never was so far, far away from the
sound of London bells before!"

"And _thou_, maiden, with the dark brown braids, eh?"

"I am an orphan," said Cicely, as she was about to weep; "my father
was a poor cottager of Liverpool."

"Liverpool--where may that place be; dost know, Admiral?"

The admiral expressed ignorance, as well he might, for it was then,
as Leland terms it, a small "paved towne with a chapel," in the
parish of Walton.

James gave each of the girls a gold chain and a purse of money and
perceiving that Howard was without a sword, presented him with his
own, which, with an expression of sadness and gratitude, this brave
English gentleman received, on his knees.  He felt his heart beating
keenly all the time, for the eyes of Margaret were fixed upon him,
with kindness and regret.

At her intercession and request, James gave him liberty to return to
England whenever he pleased; but added, that so severe had been the
ravages committed along the coast between Berwick and Dunbar, by the
ships under his command, that their crews must be considered as
ordinary prisoners of war, and be committed to some royal castle,
until John, Prior of St. Andrew's, the new secretary of state,
arranged for their exchange or transmission home.

Howard gave a silent bow of acquiescence.

Barton now whispered to Sir Andrew Wood, who, with a half smile, in
his own fashion of phraseology, informed the young king, that his
"gunner and coxswain had conceived certain matrimonial designs
against the two English prizes, and that if these fair damsels would
bring-to under their lee, he would give each of them a cottage, a
cow, and a cow's mailing, at least, for their dower, by the shore of
Largo Bay."

At this speech, Cuddie and the gunner gave their foretops a tug, and
scraped with their right feet; while the two girls cast down their
eyes and again blushed furiously, for there was a numerous circle
around them; but none of these four had a word of thanks to offer, so
completely were they abashed by the presence in which they stood; for
there was many a dark and hostile eye bent on one portion of the
group, because they were English; and on the other portion, because
they were the late king's faithful subjects.

"Come, Cuddie Clewline, stand forward," said the Admiral; "lay
alongside thine own prize, man; show thyself a sailor.  And thou,
gunner o' mine, heave ahead, sirrah; let not the king's presence
abash one who hath so often looked grim death in the face and never
blanched.  I assure thee, Willie," he continued, as the king put
Cicely's hand into the gunner's, "there is not such another bride on
this side of Cape Non.  Rogue, sawest thou ever such swelling bows
and a run so clean under the counter?  I trow not.  Hold up thy head,
man, for thou and that lumping varlet, Cuthbert Clewline, are the
only two among us who may recal with joy that night's hard battle in
the Firth."

"God bless your majesty," said Wad, "and may my drink be bilge in
this world, and waur in that to come, if I keep not a clear
conscience and a fair reckoning, having sic a consort to sail through
the voyage o' life wi'."

"And friend coxswain," said James, with a smile, "hast thou no
thanks?"

"Tickle my timmers, but I say wi' the gunner," said Cuddie, as they
backed through the gay crowd not very ceremoniously, and at that
moment the eyes of poor Falconer and Sybilla met, with a glance that
seemed to inquire, "Were there no other hearts here--whom the king's
influence might render happy?"

"Now, thanks be to Heaven, all this is over, Robbie Barton," said the
Admiral; "for when among lords I always lose my temper, and yaw in my
speech.  Gadzooks, courts are not for me; the gunner to his
lintstock, the steersman to his helm."

"Saw you how sternly the Lord Drummond regarded us?" said Barton,
gravely.

"Let him glower his een out, Robbie--an obstinate old snatchblock!"

So ended this interview, and the whole issue of it tended somewhat to
soothe the excited minds of those who were present.

That stringent act of the Scottish parliament, which ordained that
"none of his majestie's subjectes marrie with any Englishwoman," was
not passed for a hundred years _after_ the time of our history; thus
the espousals of the gunner and coxswain were duly celebrated by
Father Zuill at the capstan-head of the _Yellow Frigate_; the Admiral
gave them each a piece of land at the mouth of the Keil Burn; and it
is a curious fact, that most of the inhabitants of the thriving
village of Lower Largo have descended from these two marriages.

Barton, in the religious spirit peculiar to the time, founded and
dedicated an altar to St. Clement, according to his vow, and there
solemn masses were said till the times of Knox and Wishart.

Two days after the marriages the Admiral parted with Edmund Howard,
who returned to England sorrowfully, for he had left both fame and
happiness behind him.  The chivalric Barton escorted him to the
borders.

"Adieu, captain," said Howard, "until we _meet again_; and believe
me, that when in merrie England I reckon up the days of my captivity
among you, I will omit the happy ones I spent in Largo House in Fife."

The wardens of the marches soon achieved the exchange of Miles
Furnival, John o'Lynne, Dick Selby, and other prisoners, who, strange
to say, are all designated as "English _pirates_" in the royal
charters of land given to the Admiral, who received the island of
Inchkeith, the estate of Dron, and the lordship of Newbyrne for his
bravery.

Still poor David Falconer was forgotten; and he and Robert Barton, by
the determination, vigilance, and assiduity of Lord Drummond, found
themselves as far as ever from all prospect of successfully winning
their brides.




CHAPTER LVII.

CAMBUSKENNETH.

  "Oh, wide is the sorrow in landwart and borough,
    And dark is the symbol on proud Falkland's wall!
  For James the true-hearted, our prince hath departed,
    The king of broad Scotland lies dead in his hall!"
                                              _Ballads and Lays_.


Preparations for the young king's coronation were suspended until
after the interment of his father, whose body had been conveyed to
Cambuskenneth Abbey; and also until after the general pacification of
the kingdom.  All the realm south of the Tay acknowledged him as
king; the Castles of Edinburgh and Stirling were surrendered to him;
and now he began the task of rewarding his father's friends, and
punishing his own pretended adherents, by appointing Sir John Lundie
of that Ilk, governor of Stirling, and the Laird of Balgillo, captain
of Broughty.  On this Sir Patrick Gray, and Sir James Shaw, and
others of their party, retired to their own houses, and brooding on
revenge, entered into a closer correspondence with the agents of
Henry VII.

Thus did James punish Shaw for shutting his father out of his own
castle.

Dissension for a time seemed to be suspended around the coffin of the
murdered king, whose remains were borne with all the pomp of
regality, and all the solemnity of the Romish faith, from the Abbey
to the great Church of St. Mary of Cambuskenneth; and there those
grasping lords and loyal chiefs, who had so lately crossed their
swords in mortal strife at Sauchieburn, met side by side, in secret
prayer and sorrow--or making an outward show of both: the tall and
dark-browed Angus; the good and pious Montrose; the brave hero of
Rhodez, the Preceptor Knollis, in the robes of his order; the veteran
Lord of Concressault; the ambitious Drummond; the turbulent chiefs of
the Homes and Hepburns; the half-savage Steward of Menteith; the
rough Forester of Drum; and all the great officers of the state and
household, gorgeously apparelled and carefully _armed_.

The heralds and pursuivants, the guards and beads-men, with the
prelates of the then powerful but withal crumbling hierarchy; the
Archbishop of St. Andrew's, primate of the kingdom, with the _ten_
other bishops, (the Right Reverend Lord of Dunblane was still a
prisoner in England), with their mitres, crosiers, and crossbearers,
attended by many a relique, censer, banner, and taper, were also
there.

These prelates really sorrowed for the king, unless where family
influence and rank curbed or warped their natural feelings; but the
majority of the temporal lords, while wearing armour, a strong
evidence of their mutual distrust of each other, contrived to veil
all emotions under a calm exterior; and with their heads bent low,
and bearing lighted tapers in their gauntletted hands, they followed
through that long and lofty aisle the purple-velvet coffin in which
their slaughtered monarch lay, with the crown of "Fergus, father of a
hundred kings," the sword and sceptre above him; and there, to the
sound of trumpet, bell, and organ, amid the half-hushed murmur of a
thousand tongues that prayed, they lowered him into his narrow home,
beside his wife, the queen, Margaret of Oldenburg.

As the vault closed over him, faint and distant came the boom of the
minute-guns, as they rang from the dusky towers of Stirling, where
the royal standard hung, half hoisted, in the sunny air.

Sir Andrew Wood, Barton, Falconer, and their barge's crew, stood by
the closing grave, and there was not an eye unmoistened among them
when Rothesay dropped the velvet cord that lowered down his father's
head; but the Admiral could not repress his inclination to compliment
Lord Drummond and other nobles "on the great _fortitude_ they
displayed on this sorrowful occasion," a jibe which made them knit
their brows.

But now none may say where James III. of Scotland and the Isles, or
his queen, Margaret of Oldenburg, are lying; for the noble Abbey of
St. Mary has been swept from its foundations; one remnant alone
survives--a lofty tower; and though the peasants still pretend to
remember the royal grave, and point it out to visitors, not a stone
remains to mark the tomb of the murdered monarch, for the place is
now a bare greensward.

The sorrow and remorse of the young prince, his successor, were long
and deep; and it was by the advice of the good abbot, Henry of
Cambuskenneth, he resolved to atone for the part he had taken against
his father by wearing next his skin a belt of iron, to which every
year he should add a weight, while he shortened it by a link.

While this remarkable belt was preparing,--while Gray and Shaw were
plotting with England,--while Borthwick lurked in Berwick, and
rewards were offered in vain for the murderers of the king,--while
Sir Andrew Wood busied himself in preparing a fleet to meet one which
Henry VII. was said to be secretly preparing against Scotland, while
openly he avowed his intentions of pressing by diplomacy the long
projected marriage of the Duke of Rothesay, now James IV., with his
daughter, Margaret Tudor, of dubious reputation,--while the Bishop of
Dunblane was still detained in England, in defiance of international
law,--while all these events were passing, or in progress, measures
were taken by Lord Drummond to have his daughter Margaret--now
restored to her family--acknowledged as queen-consort by the king,
who spent much of his time in the charm of her society at Dundee and
Dunblane.  But fresh delays occurred, for the late king's loyal
adherents had risen in arms, inspired by that wild inborn love of
justice so natural to the Celt--for every Scottish Lowlander has,
more or less, Celtic blood in his veins.

Beaton, the miller of Bannock, now related the barbarous manner in
which James III. had been butchered.  Lord Forbess, in armour, rode
through the clans on the northern slopes of the Grampians, displaying
upon his lance a bloody shirt, said to have been taken off the king's
body; the venerable Earl of Lennox joined him at the head of five
thousand Highlanders; but the Lords Drummond, Home, and Hailes,
marched against them with all their vassals.  Favoured by information
received from a deserter named Alexander Mac Alpine, Lord Drummond
surprised these loyal insurrectionists in their camp at the Moss of
Sassentilly, near Stirling, and routed them, after a brisk
engagement, with great loss of life.

Pushing on from thence, he took the Castle of Dunbarton, which the
Earl of Lennox and the Lord Lyle endeavoured in vain to defend.

For these services Drummond received a grant of Lennox's forfeited
lands in the lordship of Menteith; Home was appointed Lord Warden of
the Eastern Marches and High Chamberlain of Scotland.  In the same
month, Hailes obtained the Earldom of Bothwell, with all the
forfeited estates of John Ramsay, the loyal Laird of Balmain, who had
fallen at Sauchieburn when charging at the head of the royal guard;
he was moreover made Lord Warden of the Western Marches, High Admiral
of Scotland, and master of the young king's household; so old Lord
Drummond returned to court in excellent humour with himself, and
highly delighted to find that a shower of favours had descended upon
his two intended sons-in-law.

James IV. had painful doubts regarding the fight at Sassentilly; for
the men who were defeated there had been his father's dearest
friends, and the banner they fought under was no feudal flag or royal
standard, but the gory garment borne on the lance of the Lord Forbess.

He asked his father-in-law if there was anything he could bestow upon
him.

"I seek naught," said he; "I am a lord of that ilk, and the Drummonds
have no need of titles; terror and antiquity had caused their name to
be venerated enough in the land."

This was but a species of the pride that aped humility; but it was so
peculiar that the young king laughed.  Without much pressing, the old
lord accepted the office of Justice-general of Scotland--and a deal
office it proved to most of his enemies; but "the contumacy of those
gipsies," his daughters, proved a source of continual annoyance to
him.

As corruption and bribery were (and not unfrequently are still) the
highway to public offices in Scotland, it is wonderful that we do not
find Shaw or Gray installed as lord advocate; but that official was
merely a lawyer then, without any pretence of being a statesman, and
so the post was not held in great repute.

The reader may marvel whether Master--we beg pardon--Sir Hew
Borthwick was troubled by his conscience; but it must be borne in
mind, that those facile Scots, who from time to time (since the days
of Sir John Menteith down to a very recent period) have sold
themselves to English ministers, never had a conscience to trouble.
Besides, a few acts of slaughter, more or less, in a lifetime, were
of little consequence in those days; thus any twinges experienced by
our Scottish cosmopolite were principally those of fear.

One fact is _certain_; there is no record of Stirling, Shaw, or Gray
ever having been punished for abetting him in the barbarous
assassination of the king; and though even _he_ escaped all judicial
penalties, his ultimate fate was not a happy one, as shall be seen in
the sequel to the events we have narrated.

As time progresses and the world turns round, even the most serious
events are fated to be faintly remembered or soon forgotten: thus,
the grave of the unhappy James III. was barely closed, when his young
successor in the assembled parliament was forced to give his royal
sanction to an act which was brought forward and carried by an
overwhelming majority of the powerful lords and their adherents, the
commissioners of shires and burghs--an act which declared that the
slaughter of the late king and of his followers was the just reward
of their own crimes and deceit; and that James IV. "and the _trew_
Lordis and Barronis that were with him in the same field were
innocent, free and quyte of the slauchters;" and that copies of this
deed, with their seals attached thereto, should be sent to the
Vatican, to the courts of "France, Hispanzie, Denmark, and other
realmes as shall be expedient for the tyme."

The old Mareschal de Concressault, who, as a Scottish baron, had a
seat in the house, now demanded from the prior of St. Andrew's his
passport, with a safe escort back to France; and in addressing the
three estates upon the late events, he adverted severely on the
spirit of treason, conspiracy, and rebellion, which seemed to be
spreading over Europe, every kingdom and state of which had been
convulsed, as well as Scotland.

"To wit, my lords," he continued, "France under Louis XI., Flanders
and Holland under Charles the Warlike, Gueldres under Duke Arnold,
who is now imprisoned by his own son, and England under Henry VI. and
Edward IV.  But rest assured, my lords, that in each and all of these
countries, a just Heaven will punish those who have advanced, with
swords drawn and banners displayed, against the Lord's anointed!"

"Laird of Pitmilly, this is but pyots talk," was the insolent reply
of Angus; "for we remember, my lords, that Louis of France, Charles
of Burgundy, John II. of Portugal, and Richard III. of England, have
all endeavoured to play the tyrant in their own countries, as well as
King James in Scotland; and if they have not been duly punished for
it in this world, they will assuredly smart for it in the next!"

And then, as the veteran Concressault left the assembly for ever, the
grim Scottish nobles only smiled as they played with their long
swords, and remembered that they had forced James III., when seated
on the same throne now occupied by his sad-eyed son, to _stitch_ the
patent of James Douglas, Lord of Dalkeith and Earl of Morton, the
parchment of which he had torn in a fit of just indignation at the
"inordinate royalties and privileges it contained."

Though no declaration of war had been made--for Henry had yet hopes
of achieving an alliance by marriage--political relations between
Scotland and England were somewhat dubious.  Thus, to prevent any
hostile interference with the French ambassador, Sir Andrew Wood,
with the _Yellow Frigate_ and a ship named the _Flower_, was ordered
by the Lord High Admiral Hailes, now Earl of Bothwell, to convey the
Sieur de Monipennie to Brest; and thus he prepared for sea with all
speed.




CHAPTER LVIII.

DOUBT, FEAR, AND SECRECY

  "Oh, sweet Margaret! oh, rare pale Margaret!
  What lit your eyes with tearful power,
  Like moonlight on a falling shower?"--TENNYSON.


Since the day when the English prisoners were presented to James IV.
at Leith, Euphemia and her sister Sybilla had no opportunity of
meeting, or even seeing Barton, or Falconer.  They were kept in
strict seclusion at their father's mansion in Dundee, while their
lovers were compelled to remain as much as possible on board their
ships, owing to the dangers that menaced them ashore; for the
unscrupulous emissaries of Drummond, Home, and the new-made Earl of
Bothwell, were ever on the watch for them; moreover, their presence
was constantly required during the refitting consequent to the late
engagement and the projected voyage to Brest.

These repairs were conducted at the New Haven above Leith, where the
king's dockyards were then established.

James IV., about 1512, had no less than forty-six ships of war built
here and elsewhere; one of these, the _Great Michael_, was the
largest vessel in the known world; she carried a thousand men, was
two hundred and forty feet long, and cost £40,000--an enormous sum in
those days.  For the accommodation of the workmen, at Sir Andrew
Wood's suggestion, he built a chapel dedicated to Our Lady and St.
James, the eastern window and gable of which are yet remaining in the
Vennel of New Haven.  If Scotland, in 1512, could equip such a fleet,
before the value of her vast iron mines, her forests of fir and oak,
and the convenience of her deep bays and salt lakes were known, what
a noble armament could she now launch upon the waters of the Tay and
Clyde!

Margaret Drummond, though happy in her restoration to her royal
husband (who was making every requisite preparation for espousing her
publicly on his coronation day, after the arrival of the papal
dispensation), never mentioned that her sisters had lovers of more
humble pretensions, who were known only to their own family circle.
Her father had laid her and them under the most stern injunctions of
secrecy, and thus the young king believed that his two beautiful
sisters-in-law were the affianced brides of Home and Bothwell; and
though he had no great admiration for the characters of those
turbulent and unlettered lords, he had no desire to excite dissension
anew by seeking other spouses for Euphemia and Sybilla.

Thus overawed by their parent, the sisters locked the secret in their
own breasts, and were miserable; for this old, habitual terror of
their father was mingled with the love and respect which were due to
him, and united to a long foreknowledge of his unbounded pride, his
imperious spirit, his calculating ambition, and his haughty will,
which had never, since the hour of his birth, been thwarted, and
which made him follow to the death any man who dared to mar, in the
most trifling manner, the plots he wove and the plans he laid for the
aggrandizement of himself and his family.

Confident in the young king's chivalric and generous character,
Barton and Falconer, with the natural bluntness of their profession,
would at once have sought an interview, told their story, and claimed
his patronage and protection; but the king was at Stirling one day,
at Falkland the next, at Dundee the third, and thus no proper
opportunity was afforded to them; the ships were soon reported as
ready for sea; De Concressault came on board, with all his train,
under three salvoes of cannon, as ambassador of France; and the
_Yellow Frigate_ and the _Flower_ got under way; and the reader may
easily conceive the emotions of Barton and Falconer when sailing on
this expedition, and leaving their loves behind them while so many
evil influences combined to cast a shadow on their hopes.

Indeed, both sailed with the most firm and melancholy conviction
that, long before their return, either by fear, coercion, or despair,
or by all three combined, Euphemia would be Lady Home, and Sybilla
Countess of Bothwell.

Their growing sadness and their many communings could not escape the
quick eyes of the old Admiral, who had been closely observing them,
one day in particular, as he was taking an observation with the
cross-staff, during a bright sunshine that equally favoured the
operations of Father Zuill, who was hard at work levelling his
lenses, mirrors, and parabolic speculum against the sails of a
fisher-boat, which he was vainly endeavouring to ignite, an
experiment which, if successful, would no doubt have excited
considerable surprise and consternation in the mind of the
unconscious proprietor thereof.  The kind Admiral, who knew well the
secrets of the two friends, endeavoured to reassure them, and laugh
their fears away.

"Alas, Admiral," said Falconer, "I never can forget that all my
fortune is in my scabbard; that my prospects of success at home are
now more dim and distant since the late king's death, and how can I
hope to be the brother-in-law of his son?  Oh, it is all vanity and
madness in me--this passion for Lord Drummond's daughter!  Yet I know
that Sybilla loves me; thus I cannot abandon her while life remains,
otherwise, I would not return with you from France, but would enlist
in the Scottish archers, or offer my sword to Robert of Patulloch, or
the Mareschal de Concressault, and seek fortune in the wars of
Charles VIII.  These nobles at home will prove too strong for us in
the end, Barton!"

"In their eyes no deed, however brave, can gild a humble birth; and
no shame is so deep as a lowly name!" said Barton.

"Well, and is not this a wisdom in the titled blockheads, after all,"
said the Admiral; "for they know that, in respecting high birth and
sounding titles, they are but paying a compliment to themselves and
enhancing their own value."

"To conceive it possible that my gentle Sybilla may be _forced_--yea,
in free Scotland, forced like a Danish serf, to marry a man who
cannot appreciate her goodness and excellence."

"There is no man so low in the scale of humanity--not even among the
rebel lords," said Barton.

"Poor Sybilla--how I love her!"

"This were vast presumption in Strathearn, Davie," said the Admiral;
"but here, on the deck of the _Yellow Frigate_, is only natural and
just,--a great lord's daughter though she be.  But tush, man! is this
the way for a stout fellow to pule and sadden like a pitiful
scaramouche?  If these damosels wed in your absence, my lads,
remember there are gude fish in the salt sea, as ever came out of it;
a rusty anchor and a rotten cable are not worth the upheaval; and so,
gadzooks! if they miss stays and get stranded in your absence, let
them e'en go, with God's blessing, and bear ye away for a fairer
haven and more seaworthy consorts."

Consolation of this kind was about as good as none; but time wore
on--day succeeded day.  After passing the straits of Dover without
seeing any sign of a hostile English fleet, which rumour said was
preparing to intercept them, and after running down the English
Channel, the two Scottish caravels doubled the point then named by
the French the _End of the World_, as no land was known to the
westward of it, and arrived in safety at Brest in Brittany.

This, though one of the best harbours in Europe, was then but a small
seaport or village, dependent on the town of Sainte Renan.

After exchanging salutes with the Castle of Brest, and being royally
feasted by the abbot and monks of its rich Benedictine abbey, the
Scottish admiral bade adieu to the Sieur de Concressault (who began
his journey to court), and again put to sea.

Passing between the Isle of Ushant and the mainland, he bore away for
Sluys, on another mission from the court of Scotland to the Flemings,
concerning that commercial dispute, which, natheless the casks of
Dutch heads, pickled by Andrew Barton, it was believed no man in
Scotland was better able to adjust than Sir Andrew Wood of Largo.




CHAPTER LIX.

REUNITED.

  "But am I not the nobler thro' thy love?
  O three times less unworthy! likewise thou
  Art more thro' love, and greater than thy years."


Meanwhile treason was not idle at home.

Sir Patrick Gray and Sir James Shaw, exasperated by the turn affairs
had taken against them, and by finding, that instead of having their
petty lairdships erected into lordships and earldoms, with many a
fair slice of the lands of the Crawfurds, the Erskines, the Stewarts,
and others, to whose confiscation and forfeiture they had fondly
looked forward, and being no longer able to exact kain and herezelds
at the sword's point again and again from the hapless rentallers of
the king's castles, they entered into a closer compact with Henry for
the removal of Margaret Drummond, and with Master Quentin Kraft, who,
eluding the chain of guards and close watch kept upon the Borders
between Tweedmouth and Solway Sands, had the hardihood to re-enter
Scotland disguised, and he, together with Borthwick, who still lurked
about the town and Castle of Berwick, were, as before, their ready
means of communication with the court of London.

The two anti-national knights had both conceived a mortal grudge
against Sir Andrew Wood, for no other cause, perhaps, than his being
a sterling and unflinching patriot, who, by taking the English ships,
had restored Margaret Drummond to her princely lover.  Thus they had
many a long conference, and one in particular on the very day after
he sailed for Brest.

Shaw, as usual, half intoxicated,--and Gray, nervous, grim, and fiery
as ever, sat over their wine in the half-naked hall of Kyneff, where
Kraft, the notary, or attorney--for he was called both--prepared a
statement of the number of ships, men, and guns carried by Admiral
Wood.  With this paper he departed on the spur to Berwick, from
whence Borthwick conveyed it to London (then a four-weeks' journey at
least), and there he informed the Bishop of Winchester, the secretary
of King Henry, who was then residing at Baynard Castle, that on
leaving Brest, the Scottish admiral would sail for Sluys; and that by
having a powerful fleet to intercept him, he might easily, at one and
the same time, crush one of the young king's most gallant subjects,
assert the superiority of England on the sea, and revenge the affront
so lately put upon her arms in the battle of the Firth of Forth.

Though kings had generally as little power of choice in love, then as
now, and had to submit to the wishes and will of their subjects, and
to the interests of their country, James IV., after striving to
banish from his mind the gloom his father's fate had brought upon
him, and after exiling from his presence most of those who had been
the cause of that hapless father's downfall, gave himself up to the
joy and intoxication of his passion for Margaret Drummond--a passion
all untrammelled now by secrecy, and uncurbed by caution.

The whole nation knew that he loved her now--that they were secretly
married, and that a little daughter had been born, to secure whose
legitimacy and regal rights the dispensation of the Pope alone was
wanting; and the Lyon King of Arms had gone to England, empowered to
demand the instant liberation of its bearer, or denounce war by sea
and land.  But though anxious to destroy Sir Andrew Wood and his
companions, and also to detain the Bishop of Dunblane, the subtle
Henry VII. had no intention, if it could be avoided, of having a
crisis so fatal to his darling matrimonial projects; and he still
resolved, that by fair means or foul, Lord Drummond's daughter should
be removed, to make way for an English princess.

It was now the beginning of August: the birds had ceased to sing, and
were training their newly-fledged broods; the swallows were gathering
for their long and mysterious journey, and the ripe corn waved in
heavy ear.

The sun was setting beyond the fertile carse of Gowrie, and the
evening was warm and balmy in bonnie Dundee.

The last of the traders had left the meal-market, and the lorimers,
the bonnet-makers, the wabsters, and cordiners, had closed their
booths about the old Salt Iron.  The various bells were ringing for
the vesper service, and the broad blue river, with its picturesque
craft, lay sleeping in its beauty between the yellow sands and
fertile slopes of Fife and Angus.

Dreaming little of the tangled web of trouble, care, and sorrow
Scottish guile and English gold were weaving round their young and
loving hearts, James and his fair-haired consort occupied the old
Palace of St. Margaret, of which we gave the reader a description in
the earlier chapters of this history.

The royal guard had been re-established under another captain, the
town was occupied by a great number of armed men--Drummonds, Homes,
and Hepburns,--all flushed with their recent victory at Sassentilly,
and these were quartered on the wealthy citizens, among whom they
remained at free quarters to be ready for any emergency as the
country was far from being quiet or settled.

The young monarch gave himself up to all the joy of a complete
reunion with his youthful consort, but she was unusually sad and
thoughtful, as if a foreboding of approaching evil hovered in her
heart and clouded her open brow.

"Dearest," said she, after a long pause, as they sat together in a
recess of one of those deep old windows which were so well calculated
for a quiet _tête-à-tête_, "how deeply am I indebted to you for your
tenderness, which gratifies all my wishes, and anticipates all my
thoughts.  Oh, my dearest--my best beloved one!" she continued,
clinging to him like a child; "let me creep closer to you."

"Sweet Maggie," said the handsome young king, as he passed a hand
fondly and caressingly over her bright-coloured hair, which looked
indeed "as if powdered with gold dust"--and this was the same stout
hand which was afterwards hewn off his stiffened arm at
Flodden,--"every moment we are separated seems an age, and yet the
while my heart is full of thee!  But a time is coming, when in the
presence of all Scotland, we shall stand side by side upon the
throne, and the greatest peers shall kiss this pretty hand, as their
queen's."

"When our good Bishop returns--but not, alas! till then!" she
murmured, looking upward, as her soft cheek fell upon his shoulder,
"he is a weary time away."

The brightness of pure love shone in her fair face; and this young
queen--for a queen, indeed, she was, though the Church would not yet
acknowledge her--seemed enchanting in her beauty and her innocence.

"Fools speak of the right divine of kings," said James, gazing
tenderly upon her.  "By my soul, dear Margaret, the power of a
beautiful woman is the only one that comes direct from heaven."

Margaret only sighed at this compliment, and her eyes filled with
tears.

"Still nursing thine old sadness, Margaret!"

"Ah, call me pet names, as you were wont to do."

"Well, then, Maggie, why so sorrowful?"

"My aunt, the Duchess of Montrose, told me that there is a rumour
going abroad--that--"

"That what?"

"That an old prophecy of Thomas of Ercildoune says,--

  "When Pausyle and Tweed meet o'er Merlin's grave,
  Scotlande and Englande one king shall have."


"There they can never meet, thank God!" said the king, laughing:
"though Merlin lies buried in Drummellier, by Tweedside; for there I
have seen his tomb.  But what doth an old rhyme matter to us, Maggie?"

"They say moreover--"

"Who are _they_?"

"The people," said Margaret, giving way to tears, "that this prophecy
will be accomplished by your wedding the daughter of Henry VII."

"Those who say so are fools!  Has not this cunning old Tudor a son,
who will be Henry VIII.?  No English king can reign over Scotland,
and I would not sit on the English throne were I its heir to-morrow;
for who, then, would be king of broad Scotland, Margaret? and who
would be a barrier between her people and the tyrannical nobility?
Besides, tidings must long ere this have reached the English court
that we are married, and well must Henry know that thus all hope of
fulfilling the terms of that state betrothal, which assigned _another
Margaret_ to me, is at an end for ever."

Margaret only sighed, and her tears continued to fall.

"My bounibel," said James, "here are luxury, wealth, grandeur, rank,
and greater are yet before thee; yet thou art not happy."

"Oh, pardon my ingratitude; but I have such strange dreams by night,
and such dark forebodings by day!  Something is always wanting to
complete happiness."

"That is the curse of life, Margaret."

"Of mine at least," said she, folding her soft little hands.

"And that want--"

"Is security," said Margaret, sighing.

"Thou wilt always be loved and respected, Maggie," said her boy
husband, as he caressed her; "for thou art not valued by the dimness
or splendour of thy fortune, but for thy sweetness and piety, thy
goodness of heart and purity of soul, rather than imaginary nobility
of name."

"But your majesty must be ever watchful and ready to defend from
danger your poor Margaret, who loves you so well--better than all the
world beside;--yea, better even than her little babe--_ours_; and you
must not leave me so often and so long for those meetings of council
and affairs of state, for dire forebodings of evil crush me whenever
I am left alone."

"Why so fearful of plots and wiles, sweet Maggie?  But take courage,
for I would defend you against a world in arms; and fear not either
for our fair-haired little one, who may one day wed some gallant king
of France or Spain, when she is beautiful as thyself, my kind-eyed
Maggie!"

Such was one of many similar conversations which took place between
the young king and his secretly wedded wife, while they awaited the
bishop's return and the coming coronation; but whether the dark
presentiments that hovered in Margaret's timid mind and saddened her
winning manner were false or true, a little time will now serve to
show.




CHAPTER LX.

LONDON IN 1488.

  "Sir John got on a bonny brown beast
    To Scotland for to ride--a;
  A brown buff coat upon his back,
    A short sword by his side--a;
  Alas! young man, we sucklings can
    Pull down the Scottish pride--a."
                                _Sir John Mennis_, 1639.


Saint Swithin's Day in 1488--fortunately a fair and sunny one--was
the busiest ever witnessed in the good city of London, if not since
the English capital had a name, at least since the mayoralty of the
loyal and wealthy Sir William Horne, whom King Henry VII. had
knighted in the preceding year at Hornsey Park; and from its
countless wooden thoroughfares--bricks were only beginning to be used
about thirty years before--she poured forth her thousands, to witness
the departure of a gallant admiral against the Scots.

"The first article of an Englishman's political creed," saith my Lord
Halifax, "must be that he believeth in the sea!"--and a very good
article it is.

Hence Henry VII. was so deeply concerned by the humiliation of
Howard, that he summoned the most expert and experienced mariners in
his kingdom, "and after exhorting them to purge away the stain east
upon the English name," he offered the then handsome pension of a
thousand pounds yearly, to any man who would undertake to bring
before him, dead or alive, Sir Andrew Wood of Largo, though it was
now a time of truce, and actually of treaty between the two nations;
but such were the anomalies of an age when no man was particular
about anything but the length of his sword and the trim of his
beard--if he had one.

In this new project Henry had many difficulties to encounter, for at
that time, England was almost destitute of a navy.  "Before the reign
of Queen Elizabeth," says Fuller, "the ships-royal were so few that
they deserved not the name of a fleet, and our kings hired vessels
from Hamburg, Lubeck, yea, from Genoa itself."  The _Great Harry_,
his first ship, cost him one hundred and fourteen thousand pounds;
before this, he used to seize or press merchant vessels for warlike
purposes when he required them.

The celebrity for skill and valour enjoyed by Sir Andrew Wood, caused
him to be so much dreaded by the English, Dutch, and Portuguese, that
some time elapsed before a volunteer was found.  At last Sir Stephen
Bull, a naval captain of known talent and well-tried courage, offered
his sword and services to the King, who accepted them with joy; and
three vessels, the largest and strongest that England could furnish,
well-manned by chosen men, and mounted with heavy cannon, were placed
at his disposal by John de Vere, Earl of Oxford, who was Lord High
Admiral of England from the year 1485 to 1512, and who spared no
pains to fit out this half chivalric and wholly vindictive
enterprize,--for to their glory be it said, the English
nobles--unlike the Scottish--have always been distinguished by a high
degree of patriotism and love of the honour and interests of their
native country; identifying themselves with both in all ages.

The chief of these three ships was the _Unicorn_--the caravel of the
late Sir Andrew Barton.

Sir Stephen had been a merchant-trader of London, and was well known
at Staple Inn, where the dealers of those days exposed their samples
of wool, cloth, and other commodities for sale; and no vote had more
influence than his at Aldermanbury, where the Guildhall was then
situated, and where the council met; but fired by a laudable and
honourable desire for upholding the glory of "Old England," he had
buckled on his armour, and left his buxom dame and comfortable
mansion with its _glazed_ windows--then no ordinary luxury--at the
corner of Fenchurch-street, near the Aldgate, to wage battle against
"the hot and termagant Scots."

To the great, or uneducated mass of the English people, even in the
present age, Scotland is a country of which but little is known.
_Then_ it was deemed a distant and remote, as well as hated land, and
all expeditions against it, were fraught with danger and death.

In those "good old times" there were no electric telegraphs; no
mails, rails, or "own correspondents," and no resident ambassadors or
consuls.  Every Scot entering England became a prisoner; every
Englishman entering Scotland might be lawfully killed or captured by
whoever could catch him.  These were pleasant times withal; and thus,
though it was a season of peace between the two countries, Henry,
after wisely considering the recent convulsion in Scotland, and the
new King's extreme youth--thought he might risk a little to punish
the bold Scottish mariner, in the same fashion in which he had
overwhelmed Sir Andrew Barton; and if war was declared by Scotland
thereanent, he might easily contrive to repudiate the whole affair as
a military quarrel between two rival knights--a passage of arms upon
the sea.

Sir Stephen Bull had hoisted his flag on board the captured
_Unicorn_, and he had spared no pains or expense in fitting her up;
thus, not content with all the King gave him, he had borrowed largely
from the opulent money-lenders in Lombard-street.

Edmund Howard was his captain.

The second ship was commanded by Miles le Furnival, son of the Lord
of Farnham in Bucks--an ancient house, whose tenure it was to find
the King of England a right-hand glove on his Coronation day, and to
support his right arm when he held the sceptre.  Their town
residence, still known as Furnival's Inn, stood on the north side of
Holborn.

The third ship was under the orders of the wealthy Fulke, Lord of
Fulkeshall (now better known as Vauxhall), who is said to have been
an ancestor of Guy of notorious memory.

Immense quantities of iron balls and stone shot--the latter from the
royal quarries at Maidstone in Kent--had been put on board of these
vessels, and they were crowded by the best marksmen of the ancient
Fraternity of Artillery, or Gunners of the Tower; and the chief of
these was our old friend, tall Dick Selby, the best cudgel-player
that ever broke a head at Moorfields, or tossed the bar at Finsbury,
and who, moreover, was the blithest toper that ever tossed off a
horn, as the bluff host of the Belle Sauvage on Ludgate Hill was
ready to testify.

Many brave volunteers accompanied Bull; these were all members of
noble families--some of them gay fellows, whose white feathers and
laced mantles would long be missed by many a bright blue eye in
Paul's Walk, as the aisle of the great cathedral was named, being the
favourite place of the Londoners for gossip and promenades; many,
too, would prance no more among the horsemen at the Smoothfield, on
Friday, or lounge at the Priory of St. John, at Clerkenwell, where
the Sacred Mysteries were performed in the fine summer evenings.

Thus, the three ships were manned by mariners of tried skill, and
soldiers of proved courage; but among them were not a few desperadoes
from that sanctuary of miscreants, St. Martin's-le-Grand.

"Bring ye back my daughter, Captain Howard," cried old Abel Eyre, the
stout fishmonger of Knightrider-street, as he came off to the
_Unicorn_ in a wherry, from the Old Swan Stairs; "bring her back to
me, from yonder distant country, and I will give thee a pair of the
best gold spurs Giltspur-street can furnish."

"Restore my niece, Rose," added Peter Puddle, of Puddle-wharf, "for,
by my troth, I would rather she had turned cut-purse, or wedded the
greasiest scullion of Pie-corner, than become the wife of a
rough-footed Scot."

"If I ever return, good citizens," said Howard, through his open
helmet, as he looked over the buckler-ports of the _Unicorn_; "thy
daughter will be by my side.  I took her away with me, and it is but
fair I should restore her, if I can.  Farewell, sirs, and remember me
at vespers to-night," he added, with a sadness that chilled the
hearts of the two portly citizens; "for sorely my mind misgives me, I
shall never hear the English curfew bell again!"

Never had the banks of Thames seen a sight so gay or so busy, since
London Stone was first placed by the verge of the old Prætorian-road!

In a gorgeous barge, covered by an awning, decorated by pennons and
rowed by men in the royal livery, Henry VII. was on the river,
accompanied by the Lord Mayor and commonalty, all in smaller barges,
garnished with streamers and surrounded by a swarm of lesser boats,
crowded by knights, courtiers, citizens, and beautiful women, all
wearing the gayest of colours.

He wore his royal robes--a kirtle and surcoat, with his furred hood
and mantle, and the George upon his breast.  A smile of gratification
lit up his usually grave face from time to time, as he caressed his
chief favourite--an abominable monkey.

As he stood up in the barge to bow in return to the people, whose
shouts rent the sunny air, his tall thin figure was conspicuous above
his courtiers, "among whom we observed," as the newspapers would have
said had there been one in this year of grace, 1488, Sir William
Stanley, Lord Chamberlain of England, wearing his gold key of office;
Robert Lord Brook, Knight of the Garter, and Lord Steward of the
Household; Sir Richard Crofts, the King's Treasurer, and Sir Richard
Edgecumbe, his comptroller, each bearing a white wand; Berkely, the
Earl Marshal; Lord Dinham, the Treasurer of England; and Gerald, Earl
of Kildare, the newly appointed Governor of Henry's lordship of
Ireland, all attired in gorgeous costumes, while the fifty Yeomen of
the Guard--a body established only two years before--clad in scarlet
coats and black velvet caps, and armed with partisans and swords,
were in the king's great barge, with their captain, Sir Charles
Somerset, afterwards Earl of Worcester.

It was quite a gala day in London.  The beautiful cross in Cheapside,
and the Conduit, recently built by the Sheriff, Thomas Ilam, were
covered with garlands of flowers; all the bells were tolling, and the
houses which faced the river had their windows crowded with heads,
and their _horn_ lattices open,--for glass was not common in England
until the middle of the sixteenth century, and even in 1558, when
"the proud Earl of Northumberland" left Alnwick Castle for a time,
the glass windows were carefully taken out, and thriftily replaced by
plain wooden boards.

The culverins and bombardes of the Tower thundered out their farewell
salute as the ships got under way; flags were displayed on the old
Church of St. Katharine, where now the Docks are; and all the foreign
argosies and the corn traders from the Cinque Ports, which in those
days were compelled to land their cargoes at Queen-hithe, the rival
of Billingsgate, were bedecked with banners and streamers, while many
a broad piece of tapestry floated from the keep of the Tower, and
from Baynard Castle, which had been rebuilt about sixty years before
by the Duke of Gloucester.

The roofs and windows of quaint Old London Bridge, through the narrow
arches of which the ebb tide was rushing, displayed a thousand faces
and waving caps.  It had then a grotesque row of houses and shops,
forming a narrow street across the river, with a gothic Chapel of St.
Thomas à Becket; an embattled drawbridge-tower, on which Hentzner,
one fine morning, counted no less than thirty human heads, all of
which had been carefully cooked and parboiled, according to act of
parliament, in the kitchen of the said tower.

At last the topsails were sheeted home, and while their ordnance,
amid clouds of smoke replied to the farewell salutes of the Tower and
the deafening cheers of the people, St. George's red cross was thrice
lowered in adieu to the king, and the vessels began to drop down the
river, while a fry of wherries pulled by barefooted and barelegged
watermen shot after them, their occupants cheering with delight at
the anticipation of pelting with the mud of the then unpaved streets
"the rough-footed Scots" of Andrew Wood; for those of Andrew Barton,
when marched in chains through the thoroughfares of London, obtained
some weighty marks of the goodwill borne by the citizens to
foreigners in general, and the abhorred Scots in particular.  In the
days of Henry VII. and Henry VIII., we are told the London streets
"were very foul, and full of pits and sloughs," and thus, plenty of
muddy ammunition lay always at hand.

On board the ship of Miles Furnival sailed Hew Borthwick, bound to
Scotland on another mission of infamy.

A deadly and subtle poison had been prepared by a certain Master
Kraft, an herbalist whom Henry VII. patronised, and who was a brother
of Quentin the Notary.  This personage kept an apothecary's booth in
Bucklersbury, a street which, from a very early period, until the
great fire of 1666, was inhabited solely, or nearly so, by renders of
simples, medicines, cosmetics, and deleterious drugs.

This poison had been delivered by Henry's agents to Borthwick, who
was to leave nothing untried, by its means, to remove Margaret
Drummond for ever from the path of Margaret Tudor.

Thus Hew Borthwick had embarked on board the caravel of Miles
Furnival, being too wary to show himself near Captain Howard, who he
knew would indubitably fling him overboard, without mercy or remedy.

Cheer after cheer continued to be interchanged as the vessels dropped
down Thames with the ebbing tide, and with their white sails and
silken streamers shining in the sunny evening light.  The bank near
East Smithfield, known as the Red Cliff, which gave a name to the
ancient village of Ratcliffe Highway, was crowded by spectators, who
waved their adieux to the tall and stately caravels--the hope of so
many hearts.

The sun was sinking now, and soon the merry chimes of St. Clement
Danes, and the deep ding-dong of the Bow-bell in the spire of St.
Mary de Arcubus, with the smoke and steeples of London, the din of
its streets with the voices of their assembled thousands, and the
huge square tower of old St. Paul's, lessened and faded together in
the distance, as the vessels stood down the widening and winding
river, on their bold expedition to intercept Sir Andrew Wood of
Largo, on his return from Sluys.




CHAPTER LXI.

THE ADMIRAL'S STORY--THE LEGEND OF CORA

              ---------------- "Peace, Kent!
  Come not between the dragon and his wrath:
  I lov'd _her_ most, and thought to set my rest
  On her kind nursery.--Hence, and avoid my sight
  So be my grave my peace, as here I give
  Her father's heart from her!"--_King Lear_, Act i.


While the two Scottish caravels (such was the name usually given to
all large ships) lay at Sluys, the admiral left nothing unsaid, in
his rough, hearty fashion, to rouse the spirit and fan the hopes of
David Falconer and Robert Barton; but both sank lower, they grew
weary of the flat shores of Dutch Flanders, with their gaudy houses,
closely clipped hollies and stiff tall poplar trees; and of the
sluggish Scheldt that flowed so noiselessly to the sea in slime and
sunshine; and of rambling among the grass-grown fortifications of
Cadsandt, the cannon of which commanded the navigation of the river;
they were wearied too, by the endless interviews and diplomacy of the
slow, pompous, and full-fed burgomasters of Bruges, Sluys, and
Ardenburg, with their vast circular hats, great bombasted breeches,
and long iron spadas; and heartily they longed to weigh anchor for
home.

"Take courage, and be men," said the Laird of Largo to his two
friends and companions, as they lingered over their wine, one sunny
afternoon, in that famous old hostel on the quay at Sluys, the
"Yung-fraü," kept by Dame Gudule Snichtercloot, who wore a cap with
long ears, a score of petticoats, and had a long-legged stork sitting
dreamily on each of the six steep gables of her house.  "Take
courage, carles; gadzooks! had I lost heart thus every time fortune
gave me a head-wind, I had never gathered leeway in life, or been
Laird of Largo and Newbyrne."

"True, true, Sir Andrew," said Barton, gnawing the ends of his
mustachios; "but had the stout old skipper, my father, been a lord of
that ilk--"

"He would have kent to a plack the price of Scottish honour and of
the favour of foreign kings," said the Admiral, bitterly; "but being
a humble man, he deemed that Scotland was the Scotsman's gift from
God--for the poor man's sole inheritance is his country,--and so, he
fought and died for her.  Were I the Lion King of Arms, I would enact
a law of heraldry that every Scottish peer and placeman should have
his shield powdered with English rose-nobles, as indicative of the
fealty they are ever ready to transfer for lucre, But were there two
Adams in the Garden of Eden, and two Eves to mate with them, Father
Zuill?  I trow not.  Gadzooks! one man's blood is as good as the
blood of another, whatever his soul may be.  But enough of this--I
could spin you a yarn to the point, though I usually leave that task
to the boatswain.  Heard ye ever the story of King Malcolm's daughter
Cora and Mac Ian the royal huntsman?"

"No."

"No" were the replies from each side of the table.

"And of how she wedded a youth of low degree?"

"Cora!  I have heard of her," said Father Zuill, who was making a
focus with his glass in the sunshine, and endeavouring to burn a hole
in his cassock; "she was drowned in the Falls of Clyde."

"So sayeth old history, but old history is wrong.  'Twas a tale my
poor mother was wont to tell me, when I was a wee halfling callant
that spent the lee lang summer day in fishing for podleys at the auld
wooden pier of Leith, and rambling on the Mussel-cape; and many a
time have I thought of it after I became a sailor, like my father
before me; and the auld woman's kind voice came to me in dreams, when
the wind rocked me asleep on the swinging topsail-yard.  Well, fill
up the bickers--summon another stoup of Dame Snichtercloot's best
Bordeaux, and I'll tell you the tale, for it may give you heart to
bear up against your present crosses, and show how a sair broken ship
may natheless come merrily to land."

After a few more preambles, the admiral began as follows--and
although we have shown hitherto that he spoke in his own dialect, and
mingled his phraseology with many a nautical simile and salt-water
metaphor, lest the reader should tire of these, we have rendered his
story into proper language, and in short preferred to tell it in our
own way:--

Malcolm II., King of Scotland, surnamed Mac Kenneth, (his father, the
victor of Luncarty, being the third of that name) was a wise, just,
and valiant monarch, who divided his realm into provinces, putting
over each a governor or sheriff to restrain the turbulent and
lawless; he encouraged the commons to become skilful husbandmen and
tillers of the soil, and to become merchants and traders on the sea.
Under his rule all the arts of peace flourished, while those of war
were not forgotten; for by his valour he spread his conquests far
beyond the Saxon border, and by the annexation of the northern
counties of England obtained the additional surname of

  _Rex Victoriosissimus._

Hence it is, that for many years after, the eldest sons of the kings
of Scotland bore the title of Prince of Cumberland; and hence it is
that we find the inhabitants of these northern counties of England so
Scottish in aspect, dialect, and character.  Malcolm had no son; but
he had four daughters, all famous for their charms: the Princess
Beatrix, wife of Crinian Abthane of the Western Isles; the Princess
Doacha, wife of the Thane of Angus, and consequently mother of the
terrible Macbeth; Muriella, married to Sigurd Earl of Orkney; and
lastly, the Princess Cora, the most beautiful lady in the land.

Many powerful thanes and chiefs sought her hand in marriage, but the
principal competitors were Kenneth, a Lord of the Isles; Græme, Thane
of Strathearn; and Dunbar, Thane of Lothian: and so anxious was the
king to secure by her means the firm adherence of one of these
influential nobles, that he would not have hesitated to employ force
and severity, but that he loved the gentle Cora with the tenderest
love that can fill a human breast; for he had transferred to her, in
another form, all the regard he had borne the queen her mother, who
had now passed away to the company of the saints, and whose remains
lay with those of her fathers, among the royal combs of lona.

Yet, when this good king waxed old, when his brow became lyart and
his beard grew white, and when he saw that Cora, his youngest-born,
had expanded into a beautiful woman--full-bosomed, graceful, and
tall, with snow-white skin, soft eyes, and golden hair, he thought in
his secret heart, how gladly he would see her some bold warrior's
bride; lest, when the time came that he too should be borne through
the valley of corpses in Kilmalie, that some of his bearded thanes
and ferocious chiefs might decide the prize of her hand by the sword,
and so deluge the land in Scottish blood.

Many of the great lords were more than usually importunate, because
Malcolm's grandchildren, little Duncan, the son of Beatrix, and the
boy Macbeth, the son of Doacha, might both die in infancy, or when
they grew older, might perish in war, or in the forest, which was
then fraught with danger to the hunter; for the woods were full of
white mountain bulls, bears and wolves, elks, and other wild animals,
that the old Scots of those hardy times loved to encounter and
subdue, for wild sports were their chief pastime.

None of King Malcolm's court loved the chase like the Princess Cora,
and she was ever the foremost of the hunters, mounted on a beautiful
horse, which Gregory, Bishop of St. Andrew's, had procured for her in
Arabia Petræa, with its bridle of silver, at which hung thirteen
blessed bells; and as she gave each of these as a prize to the best
horseman successively, in racing round the ring, the proverb first
came among us of "bearing away the _bell_."

The old king spared no cost in the decoration of her chamber, which
was entirely hung with bright-coloured silk, and its windows were
glazed with clear beryl, though he and his courtiers contented!  them
with beds of soft heather, and had nothing in their windows save the
iron gratings which gave them security.  Moreover, the floor of her
chamber was laid with the softest furs, and her bed and her pillows
were the finest feathers, all procured by Mac Ian Rua, the Forester
of Dunfermline, and favourite huntsman of the king, in an age when
luxury was almost unknown.

She was an expert citharist, and none in Scotland sang more
beautifully; thus, each night by the royal couch she sat with her
harp on her knees, and sang the old king to sleep by rehearsing the
lay of Aneurin, describing the great Battle of Cattraeth, which was
fought in Etterick Forest, where, five hundred years before, the men
of Dunedin were almost exterminated by the Saxons of Deiria; and this
warlike song made the old king's heart leap within him, and he would
beat time with his fingers, and thus sinking to sleep, would dream of
his early days, of the field of Cramond, the flight of flanes and
shock of spears, and his battles with Danes by the Earn and the Tay.
But his chief favourite was the low sad song of "The Owl," which our
Highlanders yet sing when the cloud of night descends upon the
darkening mountains, word for word as Ossian sang it in Selma, many a
long and misty year ago.

Yet it was strange that three chiefs so powerful, so handsome, and so
valiant as the Thanes of Lothian, Strathearn, and the Isles, should
be without interest in the eyes of the young princess--for a day
seldom passed without their laying some offering before her.  Græme
brought from the Perthshire mountains the snow-white hide and sable
horns of the mighty Scottish bull, the tusks of the savage boar, the
antlers of the elk, and the claws of the red-mouthed wolf; to evince
his prowess, Dunbar of Lothian laid before her the painted banners,
the steel helmets, and white linen surcoats of the yellow-haired
Saxons whom he had slain in many a field between the Tweed and Ouse;
while Kenneth of the wave-beaten Isles brought a hundred bearded
harpers, each of whom could frame a hundred songs in her praise, and
the charms of whose united voices filled the air by day and the halls
by night with melody; while by the number and splendour of their
retinues, the usually sequestered court of the good King Malcolm was
a scene of constant gaiety and delight; for the merriment of the
palace seemed to grow apace with the years that grew upon him.

Still the princess remained unwedded, and the bells of many a church
and chapel had rung on her twenty-third birthday, before the king
began to lose patience; but whenever he waxed wroth, or even serious,
Cora spread her white hands over her harp, shook back her long golden
locks from her smiling face, and sang the song of "The Owl" with an
eye so bright and a voice so sweet, that the kind king laughed at her
drollery, kissed her, and was pacified.

Pondering on her opposition to his dearest wishes, one evening when
the sun was low in the west, Malcolm II. left the old tower in the
woods by a secret door, and wandered into the deep dark glen of
Pittencrief.

The sunlight streamed along the wooded hollow, and tinged with many a
brilliant hue the topmost branches of the tallest trees and the red
battlements of the old tower which crowned the summit of the
_Dun_,--a steep and lofty rock, at the base of which flowed a stream.
The brown fox shot across the leafy dell, the dun fuimart peeped from
among the long grass, and the cushat dove cooed on the branches of
the ivied oaks, as the king walked slowly and thoughtfully on, until
he reached a nook in the copsewood, where a pair of lovers were
sitting side by side and hand in hand, with the arm of the man around
the white neck of the maiden, whose soft cheek rested on his brown
and sunburned face.

Then the old king paused, with a finger on his bearded lip, and held
his breath, for their figures seemed familiar to him.

The maiden wore a mantle of yellow linen, with a tunic of scarlet
silk that reached to her ankles, according to the fashion of the
time; and instead of sleeves, this tunic had openings for her arms,
which were white as hawthorn flowers, and were encircled by bracelets
and armlets of fine silver.  After the custom of all unmarried women,
her hair, which was of the brightest golden colour, was uncovered,
untied, and flowed in ringlets over her neck; and a brooch, which the
king recognised to have been a gift of his own, beamed on her left
shoulder.

Roused by a step among the last year's leaves, she started, and
turned her beautiful face from her lover's breast, in fear and
confusion.

"Cora!" said the King, in a breathless voice, and stood as one
transfixed.

The youth wore a lurich of linked mail, with a cap of steel, and an
eagle's wing therein.  In his hand was a boar-spear, and on his back
a short bow and quiver of arrows; at his belt hung a knife and silver
bugle--for he was no other than the king's own huntsman, the son of
Red John, and usually named Mac Ian Rua.

Malcolm stood silent for a minute, full of anger, grief, and scorn,
for he now knew how her heart by pre-engagement had become
invulnerable, and why the compliments of her princely suitors--the
hardy Kenneth of the Isles, the gallant Græme of Strathearn, and the
splendid Dunbar, who ruled all the fertile Lothians, from the sands
of Tyningham on the east to the Torwood oaks on the west, were heard
in vain.

"My own huntsman, by the holy crook of Saint Fillan!  Have I lived to
see my daughter in the arms of Mac Ian Rua?" exclaimed the old King,
bitterly, as he strode forward, with his walking-staff clenched in
his hand.

"Mac Ian," he exclaimed, "thou black-hearted traitor and presumptuous
churl, what punishment is due to one who dares as thou this day hast
dared?"

"Death," replied Mac Ian, without hesitation, yet pale as ashes, and
laying a hand upon his breast, while with the other he handed his
sword to the king; "death, Malcolm Mac Kenneth; and I am ready to
die; strike and rid me of a life, that since the hapless hour I dared
to lift my eyes and heart so high, has been to me a burden and a
toil; for I lived as one who was in daily dread of losing his
all--his life, his sun, and glory!  God made thy daughter beautiful,
O king, and if to love her was presumption, strike, strike
_here_--one thrust, and all will be over!"

Pale as a statue, the Princess Cora stood between her incensed father
and her humble but handsome lover, but not one word fell from her
quivering lip, for her tongue was chained by love for both, by fear
and by a pride that was not unmingled with shame, that her father,
the proud old Malcolm II.--Rex Victoriosissimus--should have seen her
hanging like a wanton on a common huntsman's neck.

But if the king was proud, he was also generous, and with dignity
gave back the proffered sword to Mac Ian Rua.

"Mac Ian," said he, "thou has wickedly betrayed the trust I reposed
in thee, in common with all my people; yet will I forgive thee.  Take
up thy bow and hunting-spear and begone; if within three days from
this, I find thee within thirty miles of Dunfermline Tower, by the
Stone of Fate, I will have thee torn asunder by wild horses--away!"

Thus commanded, Mac Ian Rua gave the princess a glance of sorrow and
agony, and taking up his spear and bow, made a low reverence to the
king, who watched him with a stern yet glistening eye, as he strode
down the wooded glen and disappeared; for he had ever been his
favourite hunter, and the old monarch had loved well to see Mac Ian
bend that bow against the eagle, as it cleft the azure sky, or launch
that spear against the wild boar, while its angry bristles stood
erect, and its small and sunken eyes shot fire as it whetted its
foam-covered tusks on the stump of some sturdy oak; and well had the
good Malcolm loved to hear his favourite huntsman's bugle waking the
wooded echoes of Pittencrief; and he now reflected almost with
sadness, that he would never hear that ringing horn more.

"And as for _thee_, Cora," said the King, "the Black Abbess of Iona
shall soon have thee under her care; thou knowest her?  Muriella Mac
Fingon--stern, ascetic, cold as ice, and immovable as the black
stones of the isle; well, she shall have thee, if not as a nun, at
least as one who requires much good guidance, wise counsel, and
purification by prayer."

In a chamber of the old Tower, Cora secluded herself from all, and
wept over this discovery and separation with shame, anger, and grief;
but none shared the emotions of the king, save the young Macbeth, the
son of Doacha, and _his_ anger had no bounds; for he swore by the
pillow of Jacob, on which our kings are crowned, and by the black
rood of Scotland, that no mercy should be shown to Mac Ian; and for
three days this furious boy scoured all Fife in search of him,
beating every thicket and wood between Ardross and the Castle of
Lindores.

But who could baffle the pursuit, or trace the steps of a hunter so
wary, so bold, and expert as Mac Ian Rua?  He had gone off towards
the woods and mountains of the south and west; he crossed the Forth
at Stirling Bridge, not the present one, but the more ancient, which
was built in the days of Donald V., and inscribed--

  "I am free to march, as passengers may ken,
  To Scots, to Britons, and to English-men;"

and passing through the mighty forest of the Torwood, he went no man
knew whither; at least the fiery young prince and his followers could
never discover him, though a hundred head of cattle were offered for
him dead or alive.

Notwithstanding his indignation, and the justness thereof, the old
king soon missed his favourite huntsman sorely, for he loved all
manner of forestry and venery, and Mac Ian had vigorously enforced
all the laws of the woods; but now these were outraged and broken
daily; for there was none so faithful to the king as he had been.  So
all the ancient rules of the forest were violated; stray droves of
cattle broke through the royal wood at the time of St. John's Feast;
men with horn and hound passed the night there; no longer did three
blasts of a bugle announce to the keeper of the royal kitchen that
Mac Ian had found a stray cow or flock of sheep, lawfully escheat to
the king; goats rambled through the parks, and the new huntsman
omitted to hang up one by the horns, according to the ancient use and
wont; carts and wains passed through, and if the fine of thirty
silver pence was exacted, the new forester spent them at the
ale-brewster's, while the keeper of the king's wood and grass
declared by all the devils he could no longer preserve either, for
one was cut and the other eaten,--for waife-beasts rambled, and wild
men hunted with spear and horn, and laughed at the rangers, for they
now feared none, since Mac Ian Rua was gone.

Rumours of these things reached Cora in her bower; her colour came
and went, and her eyes brightened as her old nurse told them; for
these acknowledgments of her lover's courage and gallant bearing
pleased and gratified her; but now, more than ever incensed against
his daughter, the old king resolved to consign her, for a time at
least, to the care of the rigid and reverend mother, Muriella, among
those servants of God, the canonesses of Saint Augustine.  There he
hoped by prayer and solitude, by the force of good example and of
pious precept, that Cora would be led into a proper train of thought;
that the low-born churl, Mac Ian, would be banished from her memory;
and that in good time she would accept as her husband one of those
noble thanes or earls, who, in their love for her and jealousy of
each other, were ready to clutch each other's beards.

Malcolm loved this bright-haired daughter--his last and
youngest--dearly; yet he steeled his heart against her sorrows and
reluctance to be immured in that lone Hebridean Isle, and with a
train of faithful attendants departed from his Tower of Dunfermline
in the woods of Fife, towards the Clyde, where Gillespie Campbell,
the great Lord of Lochawe, was to have one of his largest birlinns in
waiting to convey the royal train from the wooden bridge of Glasgow
in all safety to the Port-na-curragh of Iona; and this birlinn was to
be steered by one who had thrice, in the name of the Blessed Trinity,
stretched his hand over the _Black stones_ of the isle; for it was an
old superstition--yea, old as the days of the Druids, that the
timoneer who did so would never fail in his steering; and that the
vessel he guided would assuredly come safe to land.  But vain were
all their reckonings, and vain their preparations.

Among the apple groves and oaken woods of Clydesdale the king and his
train lingered long, for he loved well the free green wood, and at
every turn of the old paved Roman Way by which they traversed that
long and lovely dale, the great Scottish bull, with his snow-white
mane and sable horns, shot past, crushing the trees in his path, and
making even the ravening wolf and stubborn boar fly before him.
Thus, as the king's train rode on, many a _détour_ was made, many a
shaft was shot, and many a lance was flung; but he saw none whose
hand was so perfect, or whose aim was so true as those of Mac Ian Rua
had been; and the beautiful princess smiled brightly at their
discomfiture as she rode by the margin of the descending Clyde,
making her fine Arabian horse caracole and paw the soft air of the
warm summer morning.

And now the ceaseless din of falling water was heard, where the
stream rolled over a linn of tremendous height and breadth.

There, roaring and rushing between their wooded shores, the whole
waters of the Clyde, in one mighty volume, poured over a sheer
precipice of four-and-eighty feet, down, down below, into a black and
weltering pool, from whence the foam arose like smoke, but tinted by
a hundred rainbow hues, in the hot sunshine that fell between the
jagged rocks and tangled woods like a steady flood of light, to
brighten the gushing flood of water.

Bewildered by the whirling and screaming of the wild birds, by the
grandeur and sublimity of the scene, and almost stunned by a dreamy
sense that stole over him while listening to the endless roar of that
tremendous linn, cascade, or deluge that thundered down between the
shattered woods, and boiled in foam against the upheaved crags till
it shook the very shore, King Malcolm, with his white locks streaming
on the wind from under his cap of steel, which was as girt by a crown
of golden trefoils, reined in his horse upon the brink, with his
shrinking daughter by his side, and gazed over the natural rampart
into the wild confusion of waters that hissed and boiled in the gulf
which yawned far down below.

"Look down, dear Cora," said he, kindly,--for his soul was awed;
"look down if thou darest; for in all my kingdom, from Caithness to
the Tyne, there is not such another linn as this.  The very spray, as
it cometh upward from that dark pool below, hangs on our hair like
dew!"

At that moment, a cry broke from all the royal attendants, for
scared, some say, by a loud blast from a bugle which sounded like
that of Mac Ian Rua,--others say by the din of the mighty waterfall,
the fiery Arabian steed of the princess reared up on the very verge
of that tremendous brink--reared until its sable mane was mingling
with its rider's golden hair, and wildly shook its head, till every
silver bell at its bit and bridle jangled, and with Cora on its back,
plunged headforemost down into that deep and awful den, the depth of
which no mortal hand had fathomed, and which the boldest eye shrunk
from contemplating!

In a moment Cora--the laughing and beautiful Cora, and her fiery
horse, had vanished into that hideous maelstrom, which for ages had
swallowed up rocks, trees, and herds, with all the _débris_ swept
down by that mighty stream from Clydesdale and the Western Lowlands!

The poor king closed his eyes in horror; he stretched his trembling
hands to Heaven in silent agony, and by the quivering of his bearded
lips his nobles knew that he was praying devoutly; and after
commending his soul to God, he uttered a cry of despair, and was
urging his steed towards the brink, when Græme, Kenneth, and Dunbar,
the three lovers of his daughter, with Duncan, Earl of Caithness,
Hugo of Aberbuthnoth, old Thomas of Errol, with his three sons, whose
sturdy hands and hearts in former years had turned the tide of battle
at Luncarty, flung themselves before him, and dragged his terrified
horse from the giddy verge, and forcibly conducted him from the
terrible scene.

Far down below the fall, where, calm and blue and shining, the broad
majestic river rolled between its thick dark woodlands to the sea,
three days after, the Arabian horse was found, swollen and drowned
upon the sand, with its silver bridle and all its tinkling bells; but
no trace appeared of the poor princess, from whom that fall upon the
Clyde, even to this day, bears the name of _Cora Lynn_.

Long and deep was the sorrow of the old and lonely Malcolm, who
returned to his grim and gloomy tower among the woods of Dunfermline,
and committing the care of the kingdom to Dunbar, the justiciar of
Lothian, Duncan, the chancellor, and Nicholas, the secretary, he gave
himself up to grief and contemplation, prayer, and long communings
with Gregory the Bishop of Saint Andrew's, who made him found and
endow thirteen chapels to St. Mary, in thirteen different districts;
a proceeding which, if it failed to ease the mind of the king, at
least eased his treasurer of all the superfluous cash in his
exchequer.




CHAPTER LXII.

STORY CONTINUED--"ERIS-SKENE!"

  "Horsed on a speckled steed, Biserta's king
  Traversed the extended line from wing to wing
  To close the loose array he gave command--
  Ten thousand lances flamed in every band;
  And twice five squadrons in the van of war."--_RONCISVALLES_.


Now, when too late, the bereaved king thought he could willingly have
bestowed his Cora upon even the humble huntsman, and believed he
could happily have seen her the wife of Mac Ian, or of any honest man
who would love her as she deserved to be loved; but now he had lost
her in a moment, and in a manner so terrible that it seemed like a
judgment direct from the hand of Heaven upon him, for his pride and
severity; for, thought he,--

"I may control the bodies of my subjects, or those of my children,
but God hath given me no power over the hearts or consciences of
either.  Woe is me! for the brightest diamond has fallen from my
crown, and never more will my old bosom swell while she strikes her
harp to the 'Battle of Cattraeth,' or never more will she soothe me
to sleep with the low sad song of 'The Owl,' when the north wind
soughs down the leafless glen, and the frozen lynn hangs owre the
beetling craig like the beard on an auld carles chin.  Oh, Cora!
Cora!"

And the old king kept poor Cora's harp in his bed-chamber, and often
in the stillness of midnight he wept, while his thin and wrinkled
hands wandered among the strings, and woke their old familiar sounds
again and again, till her voice seemed to mingle with them.

Now it happened that although her Arabian steed was drowned, the
princess, by some blessed miracle of Providence, escaped; for she had
been caught in her descent by one of the spouts or boiling streams
that ascended upward from the bottom of the den, and unseen among the
clouds of light and vapoury spray was flung far over a ledge of rocks
into the smoother water beyond; and while the king, her sire, and all
his bearded thanes, in their steel caps and iron lurichs, were
beating their breasts, calling upon all the saints, and fixing their
eyes upon the hazy horrors of the gulf below the lynn, she was swept
gently onward, in a dream as it were; and then the hands of some one
seemed to buoy her up; then she felt herself conveyed into a dark and
shady chasm of rock, overhung by a gorgeous mass of wild-roses and
ivy, honeysuckle and sweetbrier; and there, upon a bank of daisies
and violets, kind hands laid her gently down--a hot breath came upon
her cheek, as some one tenderly parted her soft and wet dishevelled
hair from her chilled and pallid cheek; and after remaining long
insensible, she opened her eyes to meet the enraptured face of the
bold Mac Ian Rua, for he it was who had saved her.

No other leech than love was necessary to bring the half-drowned
princess to life.  Her heart soon beat with joy, and amid the double
raptures of her escape and reunion with her lover, she forgot the
sorrow of her bereaved father, and the terror of her friends on the
summit of the cascade, from which she had been so awfully
precipitated and so miraculously saved; and for the fleeting hours of
that soft summer day till the sun sank behind the hills of
Lanarkshire, she listened to the adventures of her banished lover,
and heard him repeat a hundred times over all he had endured in
danger, absence, doubt, and grief, while hovering in disguise near
the court of the king; how he had accompanied her step by step from
the palace in Fife to the banks of the Clyde; and how by the goodness
of Heaven he had chanced to be at hand, and ready to save her from a
death so terrible, by plunging boldly into the fierce and seething
flood beyond the waterfall.

Love, like death, levels all distinctions,--and indeed he knows of
none; thus, the daughter of the king assured Mac Ian that her passion
was yet unchanged; and laving their clasped hands in the water that
flowed at their feet--that perilous water from which Cora had so
wondrously escaped--after the old fashion of Scottish lovers, they
vowed to be leal and true, and wished that if one deserted or forgot
the other, that God and the saints might so desert and forget the
faithless and untrue.

Now this wish was doubtless very wrong, yet they were not punished
for it, neither were they again separated; but to reward them for all
they had suffered during Mac Ian's exile, and to seal their faith for
ever, they received the nuptial blessing from a poor Gillie
Dhia--that is, a culdee, or servant of God--who dwelt in a cell of
rock in the wood of Cadzow; and then, to avoid all discovery, they
crossed the Forth, the Tay, and Don, and travelled far north till
they reached the forest of Glenfiddich.  There Mac Ian built a bower,
over the door of which he placed the antlers of a stag; and their
daily food was furnished by his spear and bow, while the princess
spun with her own white hands, to clothe herself and the
bright-haired children with which God had blessed them; and thus, far
from courts and camps, and the troubles of council and debate, they
lived in happiness, in peace, and in seclusion.

Eight years passed away, and though the poor old king had never
forgotten his lost daughter, he had learned to think calmly over the
events of that terrible day at Cora's Lynn, and eight times as the
mournful anniversary returned he shut himself up in a chamber,
darkened and hung with sackcloth; and there he repeated those solemn
prayers which the Church ordains shall be said for the dead; and
solemnly he rehearsed them while the hot tears coursed over his
silver beard: they were for the soul of his daughter, who was yet
living in her birchen bower, and singing to her little ones among the
woods that shroud the rolling Fiddich.

Aged though he was, the din of war now summoned Malcolm II. to the
field, against those common foemen of the British Isles, the
half-pagan and wholly barbarous Danes.

Sueno, King of Denmark, who then reigned in England, having driven
Ethelred, monarch of that country, into Normandy, had an implacable
hatred at Malcolm for yielding succour and assistance to the English,
whom the Danes were rapidly crushing; and he resolved to send an army
which should assail in his own dominions the King of the Scots, of
whose title--Rex Victoriosissimus--he was jealous and impatient.

Landing in Murrayshire, under Enotus, in the year 1009, the Danes
overthrew in battle the Scottish forces which opposed them; they took
the Castle of Nairn, and cutting through the neck of land on which it
stood, brought the sea round it, and named it Burg for the time; the
fortresses of Elgin and Forres were next taken, and for nearly a year
they held them; being the longest period that those invaders retained
possession of Scottish earth, while alive, at least.  They also took
the Castle of Balvenie, and therein Enotus built a great chamber,
which is still named the Danes' Hall.  In the following year Malcolm
marched against them in person with a powerful army, formed in three
great columns, under Kenneth, Thane of the Isles, Græme, Thane of
Strathearn, and Dunbar, Thane of Lothian; for they were yet feal men
and true to the old king whose daughter they had loved so well.

Clad in a byrne, formed of steel rings, which were sewn flat upon a
leathern tunic, and having on his head a square helmet, like those
last worn by the guards of Charles the Bald, surmounted by a diadem,
the venerable monarch rode at the head of his troops, who--although
he wore a tunic of blue silk crossed by a white St. Andrew's saltire
of the same material (which was then so rare and costly),--were
mostly clad in long lurichs, with helmets of iron, and carried
targets and swords, axes and mauls of ponderous weight, with bows and
spears, having leaf-shaped blades of bronze or tempered steel.  The
wild clans of Galwegia marched beneath the banner of their lord, all
clad in tartans, dyed with checks of purple and dark red, violet and
blue, while their long locks flowed under their caps of iron; and
they had their sturdy arms bare, as well as their legs, which were
kilted to the knee.  _Albyn!  Albyn!_ was their battle cry, and with
the sound of the harp, the horn, and pipe, they roused their fiery
hearts, when, after a march of some weeks' duration, they came in
sight of the foe, drawn up in array of war, near the old Pictish
Tower of Balvenie, then named the House of St. Beyne the Great--which
stands on a high green bank overlooking the Fiddich and the rich
landscape through which it wanders, where the dark firs cast the
shadow of their solemn cones upon its lonely waters.

South-west of the castle the barbarous Danes were formed in deep
ranks, all mailed in byrnes of iron rings, and bosses sown upon cloth
or leather, with hauberks and painted surcoats to the knee, with
spears and axes of steel and bronze, and ponderous iron maces that
swung at the end of clubs and chains; while above their heads waved
the enchanted banner with the Black Raven, which had never been
unfurled without ensuring victory.

The mighty scalp of Benrinnes was shining in the warm glow of the
rising sun; the snow-white mist was rising from the side of
Corriehabbie, and the valley, the wood and water, rock and heather,
all that make the scenery of the Fiddich so wild, so bold, and
beautiful, were glowing under a warm summer sun; while the yells of
the red-haired Danes on one side, the braying of mountain pipes on
the other, the twanging of bows, and hiss of passing arrows announced
that the battle was beginning.

The lonely heron and the mountain eagle were scared from rock and
river by the flashing of the steel; but the cries of the combatants
brought the gled and the hawk from the four winds of heaven, and high
in mid-air, with outstretched wings, they overhung the nearing hosts,
expectant of their coming feast--the flesh of horse and man.

This was the anniversary of the day on which he had lost his
daughter, and the heart of Malcolm II. was oppressed, and full of
dark and dire forebodings: so he anticipated both defeat and death.

The first charge was a furious one, and the onset was deadly and
disastrous.  The Danes plied the poleaxe, their national weapon, with
savage fury; the Scots charged with their long pikes and two-handed
swords, while swift and surely shot the archers on both sides from
the rear ranks of the closing columns.  Steel helmets and byrnes of
shining rings, bucklers of tempered iron, and targets of thick
bull-hide were cut by the sword, cloven by the axe, or pierced by the
barbed arrow, or by the spear that was launched from afar; and
unhappily in the early part of the battle, Kenneth of the Isles,
Græme of Strathearn, and Dunbar of Lothian, fell from their horses,
each struck by a mortal wound; for the first had the axe of Enotus
the Dane driven through the brass umbo of his shield and the iron
cone of his helmet, sheer down to his teeth; the second had his heart
pierced through, byrne and buff, by a leaf-shaped javelin; and the
third had a double-edged _seax_ driven repeatedly through his body.

Valiantly fought the venerable king, and as fast as men fell, their
places were supplied; but disheartened by the sudden loss of the
three greatest chiefs in the land, his soldiers began to give way,
and with a triumphant yell the heavily-armed Danes pressed on
them--their eyes sparkling with rage and the lust of blood, while the
horse-hair of their helmets mingled with their long and tangled locks
and the wild volume of their shaggy beards.

Enotus, the Danish general, a powerful and gigantic warrior mounted
on a white charger, and clad in a hauberk of burnished rings, with
the skin of a bear floating from his shoulders on which the claws
rested while the skull of the monster grinned above his basinet, soon
singled out the King of Scotland, whom he knew by his venerable
aspect, his silver beard, and the diadem of golden trefoils that
encircled his helmet, which had three upright feathers of the
iolar--for the Scottish king is the chief of all the Scottish
chiefs;--and (though around him fought Gillemichael, Earl of Fife,
Alan, Thane of Sutherland, who defeated the Danes on the nmir of
Drumilea, Hugo of the Rutherford, whose ancestor twelve hundred years
before had conducted King Reuther through the Tweed against the
Britons, Crinian, Thane of Dunbar, and others, the very flower of the
land), with his tremendous mace the Dane by one blow dashed out the
brains of the royal charger, and by a second would assuredly have
slain the king had not a sturdy warrior of the Murrayland, clad in
striped breacan and wearing the long Celtic lurich to his bare knees,
at that moment cloven the mighty Scandinavian almost in two by one
stroke of his tuagh, or Scottish battle-axe.

"Well fare thee, my stalwart soldier," cried Malcolm; "for thou hast
saved thy king!"

His protector re-mounted him on the white steed of the slaughtered
Dane, and blowing his bugle to collect the scattered Scots, plunged
into the thickest of the conflict, parting the foes before him like a
field of corn.

"By the stone of Fate," cried the King, shortening his reins and
grasping his sword, "yonder blast never came from other horn than the
bugle of Mac Ian Rua!"

So said all who heard it.

"And if yonder fellow proved to be Mac Ian?" said the king's
Secretary, wiping his bloody sword in the mane of his horse, "what
then, sire?"

"Then he should have the best earldom in the north, were it but for
the sake of her he loved and lost," said the brave old King, as he
spurred once more to battle; but alas! disheartened by the loss of
three of their greatest leaders, despite the bravery of Malcolm, and
the fiery example of this warrior of the Murrayland, the Scots began
to give way and retreat, but with their faces and weapons to the foe,
until they gained an old rampart formed of turf, trees, and stones,
the relic of former wars.

There the king's preserver encountered Enrique, the second Danish
leader, and, under Malcolm's eye, cut off his head, and holding it
aloft with one hand and his dagger with the other, cried, in Gaelic,--

"_Eris-skene!_--by this knife I did it."

"Eriskene, my brave man, thy name shall be," said the King; but
natheless these valiant deeds, the Scots were still borne back in
disorder.

Malcolm was swept away with the crowd of fugitives, who were all
wedged in a narrow valley, till he found himself near an old chapel
at Mortlach, which was dedicated to Saint Molach, the bishop and
confessor, a Scot who, in the seventh century, was the assistant of
St. Boniface of Ross, and whose bones lay in that sequestered fane.

Here the king raised his gauntletted hands to heaven, and prayed that
the holy saint would intercede with God and St. Andrew for Scotland
and her people, vowing that, if they obtained a victory, he would
increase the chapel by three lengths of his spear, and make the
church of a bishoprick dedicated to Heaven and its service.  Wheeling
round at that moment, he found a third Danish captain close by him,
and slew him by one thrust of his lance, and restored courage to the
Scots.

"Victory!  Victory!" cried Malcolm; "God and St. Andrew for Scotland!"

Like a torrent the Scots again rushed through the narrow vale, and
again many a tartan plaid and many an eagle's wing was dyed in the
reddest blood of Denmark.  So furious was their new onset, that the
Danes were swept along the valley like dry leaves before a stormy
wind, and, over a field strewn with gashed corpses and bleeding men,
were driven in headlong flight towards the sea.  The slaughter was
terrible!

Not a man of them saw the sun sink behind the great ridge of
Benrinnes; and when daylight faded in the west, the king found
himself breathless, weary, and alone in a silent and sequestered
place, where a brawling stream, flowing from a deep copse-wooded
glen, mingled its waters with those of the Fiddich, which roll from
the mountains down to the Lowlands of Banftshire.

The gloomy pines were shaking their wiry cones in the soft evening
wind; a deep blue, darkening into a dusky purple, tinted the distant
hills; the evening star was glimmering amid the blush that lingered
in the west; and the king sat down by a tree to think and to pray.

After the fury, the excitement, and slaughter of the past day, his
neart felt oppressed by its own thoughts, and a glow of rapture
struggled with his sorrow, for Heaven had that day accorded victory
to his people; and kneeling on the grass, there, in solitude and
unseen, he raised his aged eyes and hands in thanksgiving and in
prayer to God and the patron saint of Mortlach.

While he was praying thus, there came a child with a pitcher to draw
water at the stream--a little golden-haired girl of eight years,
whose face was beautiful as that of an angel, and whose bare feet, as
they brushed the heather-bells, seemed white as new-fallen snow.  She
did not perceive the king as she stooped over the water in a cool and
shady spot, and sang while her vessel filled.

"What is this that stirs within me," sighed the king, who was
troubled by the sight of this child, and whose heart yearned for for
the fairness and the beauty of her face, with the brightness and
softness of her eyes, reminded him of Cora, when she was a child;
and, that nothing might be wanting to complete this dear illusion,
the girl sang the soft, low song of "The Owl;" and as the poor old
king, still remaining on his knees, listened breathlessly, he almost
seemed to hear the voice of Cora mingling, as of old, with the notes
of her harp; "but Cora," thought he, "is sleeping in her grave among
the unblest waters of the Clyde, and her harp is in her silent
chamber, far away beyond the mighty Grampians and the broad Firth of
Tay, in the lonely Castle of Dunfermline."

The King now called the child to him, and though her first impulses
were fear and flight, on hearing his voice, and beholding a stranger
so brilliantly armed, the reverence of his aspect and the kindness of
his manner soothed and delighted her, and she approached with
timidity and curiosity mingled in her charming little face.  The eyes
of Malcolm filled, and his heart swelled as he gazed on her, and
would fain have kissed, but feared to alarm her.

"Child," said he, "ken ye where I may find a bield wherein to rest me
for the night; I am an auld man and a weary one, for I have fought in
battle this lee-lang summer day."

"My mother bydes on Fiddich side," replied the child, "and though she
dreads all strangers, she cannot fear you, for ye are auld and kind;
and my father is a strong man whom none dare wrong, for he is the
boldest archer on the Braes of Auchindoune."

"My name is Malcolm Mac Kenneth," said the King; "auld I trow I
be--yea ten times your age, my bairn, but give me your hand in mine
and lead on."

Leaning on his long sword, with his silver tresses floating over his
mailed shoulders, the king walked along, led by the smiling child,
who peeped upward at him timidly from time to time through her
clustering curls, as they went through a daisied haugh, and among the
sweetly scented hawthorn birks.  She soon prattled and talked to the
_auld knycht_, as if she had known him for all the years of her
little life; and when the good king felt the warm glow of the evening
on his cheek, and saw the bright flowers that spangled the banks of
the stream, and when he heard the rustle of the summer leaves, and
the merry brawl of the mountain burn mingling with the glad voices of
children, he felt himself young again, and his heart grew light and
joyous as he forgot the corpse-strewn field that lay near the old
Tower of Balvenie and all along the shore of the rushing Fiddich.

"Little one," said the King, "who taught thee the song of 'The Owl'?"

"My mother," replied the child.

The King sighed heavily; then after a pause, he asked,--"And thy
name, little one--what is it?"

"Cora----"

"Cora!" he reiterated, and bursting into tears, pressed her to his
breast; "I might have guessed it--Cora! what other name could be
borne by one so bright, so beautiful, and so innocent; but be not
alarmed my poor little one, for I once had a Cora like thee."

"Oh, here we byde, and yonder is my mother!" said the child, who was
terrified by the stranger's emotion; and now they found themselves
before a hunter's cot, the walls and roof of which were formed of
turf and clay; and over the door of which were the branching antlers
of a stag.  Around it was a thicket of dark hawthorns, with all their
white blossoms in full and fragrant bloom,--for as the reader has no
doubt long since surmised, this was the humble dwelling of Mac Ian
Rua which the king approached, and the beautiful matron who stood at
its lowly door, with two babies at her knee and one in her arms, was
his daughter Cora; yet the king, whose mind was full of her, knew her
not; for she no longer wore the rich attire, the garments of
many-coloured silk, the jewels and golden armlets of old, with which
he had last seen her; but a homespun kirtle and linen tunic with
sleeves that reached only to her white elbows; and about her tresses,
which once waved round her head like a golden halo, was plaited a
plain linen fillet--the _heafodes roegel_, or headrail of the Lowland
peasant woman--an adoption from the Saxons--who dwelt beyond the
English border.

The King gazed upon her earnestly, yet he knew her not; and though he
was older and his face was more wrinkled,--though his eyes were sad
and haggard, and his hair, which had been grey, was now white as the
snows of Ben Mhor, Cora knew her parent--that princely sire who had
loved her so well of old--and all the daughter gushed up in her
heart; yet not a word could she sajr, but gazed upon him trembling
with sorrow and remorse, with fear, with love, and hope, while her
children clung to her skirts, and she pressed to her bosom their
youngest born--the child of Mac Ian Rua, the banished huntsman.

"Good woman, I seek but a night's shelter in your sheiling, till my
train can join me," said the King; "be not alarmed, I am a Scottish
soldier, and have been fighting all day down the waterside.  The foes
are vanquished, and the King is safe.  Allow me to enter; and believe
that kindness will not be unrewarded.  My name is Malcolm Mac
Kenneth."

The tongue of Cora was without words.  Silently she led Malcolm into
her humble hut, and silently placed a seat for him, spreading the
softest deerskin under his feet,--for her gentle heart was full of
old thoughts and loving memories that came crowding fast and
remorselessly upon her--summoned back, as it were, by the sound of
her father's voice; yet that voice was sadder in tone, and more
tremulous than it was wont to be of old; and that conviction stirred
her hoart of hearts, and crossing her hands upon her bosom, she
thought,--"Oh, pardon me, God--for it is I who have caused this!"

"Hast thou no words to welcome me, good woman, or does this armour,
even when on an auld man's back, so scare thee?" said the King,
kindly, taking one of the children on his knee, as he perceived that
she was gazing eagerly, mournfully, and with awe upon him, as he sat
near the little window, with his silver tresses glittering in the
light of the west, and his wrinkled hand resting on the flaxen head
of his little conductress.

Cora could control her emotions no longer!

"Father--sire!" she exclaimed wildly, as she threw herself upon the
clay floor and embraced his knees; "oh, father! dost thou not know
me?  Have these few years so sorely changed me?  I am Cora--thine own
Cora, who was swept down the Lynn of Clyde.  Beloved father and
king--behold me at thy feet!  Oh thou whom I have so cruelly and so
wickedly forsaken in thine old age, pardon and forgive me, lest these
younglings should forsake me in turn; forgive me and bless me, though
I have sinned against God and thee!"

These words terrified the old king as if a spirit had spoken them.
He held her from him at arm's length, and his eyes wandered over her
face and person with an expression of fear and wonder.

"I am Cora, the little child that clambered at your knee, and nestled
in your bosom, in old Dunfermline Tower," she exclaimed,
passionately; "I am Cora whose cheek was once so dimpled--whose hair
was so bright--whose little mouth you kissed so often and so
kindly----"

"Cora was drowned! oh day of horror--horror--horror!" replied the
troubled King; "she is dead and at rest."

"She is not, for I am she."

"Thou?" he exclaimed.

"I."

"Impossible!"

"I.  Oh father, am I indeed so changed?"

A glare shot over the king's keen eyes; he trembled, and stretching
out his hands, drew her towards him, but a cloud came over his brow,
and pausing, he said,--

"And these children?"

"Are the offspring of Mac Ian Rua."

"Born of thee?"

"My father,--oh, my father!"

"Born of the daughter of Scotland?" he added, bitterly.

"My heart, long steeped in sorrow, will burst at last.  In pity,
father, have mercy on us."

"And where is the lawless traitor who stole thee from me, and hath
concealed thee for these many long years, my daughter?"

"Say rather, where is he who saved me when the greatest and noblest
in the land--yea, even Kenneth of the Isles and Dunbar of Lothian,
hung back."

"Kenneth of the Isles and Dunbar of Lothian are both lying dead in
their armour by the walls of Balvenie;--God rest them! they fought
and fell for our dear Scotland.  But Mac Ian; where is he?"

"Yonder he comes down the glade, with a stag on his back,--your
favourite huntsman, so ready of hand and true of aim; the same Mac
Ian Rua as of old," said Cora, in a trembling voice.

"Heaven be praised, my daughter, I have found thee; yet oh, to find
thee thus!"

"Oh, embrace me, or I shall die; let me feel your cheek on mine once
more, my father!"

"Come, then--come to my old heart," said the King, as he sobbed; for
it was a rude old age, when even kings had human hearts, and nobles
were not without them.

"Forgive me my sins against thee," said Cora, in a choking voice.

"They are forgiven."

"And my husband--Mac Ian Rua?"

"Even he, too, is forgiven," said the King, as the door of the hut
was thrown open, and the tall huntsman, fresh from the pursuit, and
still clad in his lurich--the same stalwart warrior who had that day
slain Enrique and Enotus, and saved his monarch's life, and whose
loud bugle blast had rallied the Scottish bands--stood before Cora
and her father, with astonishment and fear in his eyes, while one
hand grasped his axe, and the other the antlers of the stag, and his
ruddy children clung joyously to his sturdy legs.

To dwell longer on this scene would mar its effect.

The huntsman was forgiven, and the old king spent the happiest night
of his long life with his daughter on one side of him, and her
husband on the other, while his grandchildren clambered about him,
and in wild glee rolled about the floor the glittering helmet which
was encircled by a diadem.

He told them how he had pined and sorrowed, and how deep his grief
had been,--for Cora was ever the object around which all his
affections had been entwined,--and how desolate his heart, his
hearth, and home had been since her loss.

Then Cora related, that with the exception of bitter remorse at
times, how happily they had dwelt in this green bower beside the
Fiddich, far away from courts and kings, with their children budding
round them, maintained by the fruit of her own industry and the skill
of Mac Ian's hand.

They supped that night on venison broiled on a wooden spit, with
cakes of Cora's baking, and nut-brown ale of her husband's brewing.
When the old king was disencumbered of his armour, Mac Ian and he sat
over their cans and fought the battle thrice again; and when he lay
down to sleep on a soft bed of freshly-pulled heather and smooth
skins--the spoils of fell and forest--Cora produced a clairshach, or
harp cf humble form, and once more sang him to sleep, as of old, by
the warlike lay of the king of bards; that soul-stirring lay he loved
so well--"The Battle of Cattraeth;"--and often, as his eyes were
closing, the old man raised himself with a flush of ardour, as she
related the slaughter of the men of Dunedin in Anuerins' burning
words, which told how, among the Pagan Saxons, "were three hundred
warriors arrayed in gilded armour--three loricated bands, each with
three commanders wearing torques of gold."

With early morning came the king's train.  They had traced him to the
hut, and all flushed with victory, pursuit, and slaughter, Duncan,
Earl of Caithness, Nicholas, the secretary, Hugo of the Rutherford,
Crinian, Thane of Dunbar, Gillemichael, Earl of Fife, and others,
stood by his humble couch of skins, and after reporting the utter
extermination of the Danes, heard him relate the joyous and wondrous
discovery he had made overnight.

In Scotland there were great rejoicings for the restoration of the
long lost Cora, and there could no longer be competition or discord
about her hand; for Græme, Dunbar, and Kenneth lay dead on the field
of Mortlach, and she was now a wedded woman.  For his bravery in
saving first the life of Cora from the waters of the Clyde, and
secondly the life of the king in battle, the huntsman, Mac Ian, was
made thane of a thanedom in the shire of Rhynfrew; and Malcolm gave
him a coat of arms, which his descendants bear to the present time.
Moreover, he nobly fulfilled the vow he had made to St. Molach, by
adding to the chapel thrice the length of his long Scottish spear;
thus it became, as we may still see it, a church, and he made it the
cathedral of the diocese of Mortlach, of which St. Beyne was the
first bishop, and Nechtan the last, when the see was translated by
King David I. to Aberdeen, and enriched in all its revenues: and in
memory of the bloody field so auspiciously won by the saint's
intercession, he desired that the heads of Enrique, Enotus, and
another valiant Dane, should be built into the wall, and there _to
this hour_ we may still see them, bare, white, and ghastly, with
their teeth grinning from the stonework, and in the brow of each is
the broken mark of the blow under which he died.

In that church is the shrine of St. Molach, whose festival was held
on the 25th of June, and who became famous all over Scotland, but
especially in Ross-shire and Argyle, where another church was built
in his honour at Lismore.


Such was the story of the princess and the huntsman; and the moral of
it is, that we should never despair, for the spokes in the wheel of
fortune follow each other so fast that all are uppermost in their
turn.  Thus, the once despised Mac Ian Rua became the head of a great
house, still named ERSKINE, in memory of his words at Mortlach; and
Malcolm II. gave him for his cognizance a hand holding a dagger, with
the motto, "Je pense plus," and a shield _argent_, with a pale,
_sable_; then as Mac Ian loved the Clyde--for there he had won the
beautiful Cora--Malcolm gave him the lands, barony, and castle of
Erskine, and from his marriage sprung a race that never failed their
king or country--the loyal and noble Earls of Mar.*

Such was the story of the Admiral, an old legend, which, as before
mentioned, I have given in my own words rather than his; for many
parts of the narrative, as _he_ told it, would not have been
over-intelligible to landsmen.


* The death of Cora, at Cora Lynn, is an ancient legend, still
remembered in Clydesdale.  The scene of the Battle of Mortlach is
still marked by many sepulchral mounds, full of bones and broken
armour.  The bishopric is said to have originated in the king's vow,
and it was confirmed by a bull of Pope Benedict VIII.  The charter of
erection by the king is still preserved in the chartulary of
Aberdeen.  It begins in the usual form "Malcolmus Rex Scottorum," and
consists of only five or six lines, and ends with "Teste meipso apud
Forfar, octavo die mensis Octobris, anno regni mei sexto."




CHAPTER LXIII.

THE BROKEN WEDDING-RING.

  "His little hardy infant son
    Sits crowing on his lusty neck;
  His wife--a fair and tender one--
    Murmurs and weeps upon his cheek;
  The sail is set, she clears the shore,
    She feels the wind and scuds away,
  Heels on her little keel, and o'er
    The jostling waves appears to play."


While all these events which have been narrated had taken place,
Jamie Gair, the fisherman of Broughty-point, had been quietly fishing
and selling, or selling and fishing, and while battles were won and a
kingdom lost, he had nothing to agitate his mind of greater
importance than an occasional foul wind, or an evil omen, such as
meeting a cat, a pig, or an old woman, when about to embark, or
seeing two crows flying together--an infallible sign of misfortune;
or losing a net, and being unable to settle his twine bill--a serious
matter for a poor fisherman.

During the last days of July, he had suffered so many omens to deter
him from putting to sea, that the imperative necessity for braving
all such absurd dangers and superstitious fears, and of departing for
the fishing ground, made Jamie prepare his nets and floats, though
advised by his companion and partner in the boat, John o' the
Buddon-ness, that the weather, which had been squally for some days
past, was likely to become more so.

"Toots, carle," said Jamie, as he knotted the last brown bladder to
the net; "the Crail fisher that passed in here yestreen said the sea
had been roaring at Kincraig, a sure sign o' fine weather; so let us
trip our anchor, and hie awa', John, for the last cogfu' o' meal is
in Mary's girnel, and I daurna' byde langer by the ingle cheek, like
a lubberly land-louper."

"E'en as ye please," replied John, drawing on his long rough boots;
"he that will to Cupar, maun to Cupar."

"But Mary, my doo, what is asteer, lass, and wherefore greet ye?"
asked Gair, whom John's proverb annoyed.

"Oh, Jamie, look on _this_, and then say whether you suld gang to the
fishing this day!" replied Mary, showing her wedding ring, which by
some fatal mischance had been broken in two; and in Scotland this is
deemed an invariable sign of approaching separation.  People lived in
an atmosphere of omens in those days; thus Jamie was sorely
staggered: but he had been inert so long, that to linger longer on
shore was to ruin himself.  He held his cottage from the castellan of
the king's castle, and its rent had to be punctually paid when the
time came.  For many days his kain of fish had not been delivered at
the barbican gate, and though the new governor, the Laird of
Balgillo, was a man of a very different character from Sir Patrick
Gray, yet he could be trifled with no longer!  And now the herring
droves were sweeping down from the Northern Ocean; and seaward Jamie
Gair resolved to go, though John o' the Buddon-ness looked stern and
gloomy, and Mary wept and held up their little son and heir for the
last kiss of his father's rough and bearded cheek,--and a _last_ kiss
it proved indeed to be!  But let us not anticipate.

"The ring will mend, Mary," said Jamie, as he kissed away the tears
from her blooming cheek; "and bethink ye, lass, can an omen o' evil
ever be shown by a ring that was blessed by the auld Monk o' Sanct
John at the Sclaitheughs?  I trow no."

After a breakfast of peasebannocks, cheese, and hot Lammas ale,
thickened by eggs, the fishermen embarked, trimmed their boat, braced
the yard sharp up to the north wind, and bore down the estuary.

There was a grey sky overhead, and a rolling sea below; the horizon
looked dark where it met the line of ocean, and the waves lifted
their white tops between.

The wind whistled drearily along the shores of the Firth; the
breakers boomed on the low flat sands of the Buddon-ness; the gusts
that came at times strained the braces of the brown lug-sail, and
while they lifted the boat's sharp prow above the water, they tore
the white spray off the dancing waves, and threw it far along the
sea, like heavy rain or mist.

Mary's form in her mantle and lowland wyliecoat had faded to a speck
on the sand, and now the square tower of Broughty and the Hill of
Balgillo began to sink among the grey vapour that crept along the
shore.  The cottage on the beach was all the world to Jamie Gair, and
the boat that was dwindling into a black spot in the grey and dusky
offing, was all the world to Mary.

Jamie whistled and sang, as the waves rolled past.

"There will be a grand haul of herrings to nicht!" said he; but his
partner, John o' the Buddon-ness, made no reply, for his keen eyes
were fixed to windward.  He had an uncomfortable feeling in his
breast--for old seamen have secret instincts about the weather,
instincts of which a landsman knows nothing, and in which he cannot
share: but the evil foreboded by this old man's heart was different,
perhaps, from what he anticipated.

"Tak' a pull o' the sheet, John," said Jamie; "though the weather
looks grey, we are as safe as our neighbours--be a man--trust in God
and St. Mary!"

"I do trust in them," said the old man, touching his bonnet with
reverence as he looked upward; "but neither God nor St. Mary have
said men shall no be drooned.  I can face saut water and the northern
scud, Jamie, as my faithers did before me--and face them like a man
as ye say, and neither blench nor quail."

"Keep her away another point or sae," said Jamie, "for the glare o'
the kelpfires and the saut pans have scared the droves frae this part
o' the shore,--and mairower, the _waterburn_ has been here for a week
and mair."

This is a luminous appearance of the sea, which, like lightning, has
the effect of scaring the herrings from the coast.

It is usually about this season--the end of June or middle of
July--that the great _heer_, or shoal of herrings from the north,
appears at the extremity of the northern isles of Scotland.

Where they come from, no man knows; but a surface of many hundred
square miles of water becomes literally alive, and teeming with this
prodigious body of fish.  All the ocean seems to ripple around them,
while whales are tumbling and myriads of porpoises surging and
plunging through them, and clouds of gulls and gannets accompany
them, screaming and in full flight.

The Scottish fishermen aver that they can scent this mighty drove
from afar off, by the strong oily smell with which the air becomes
impregnated.  This yearly invasion divides into two bodies, one of
which seeks the Ebudoe and the Irish Channel; the other keeps along
the eastern and western coast of Scotland till October, and then,
from her countless creeks and harbours, she sends forth her
clinker-built fleets to net the annual mine of wealth with which her
waters teem.

By sunset Jamie Gair and his companion reached the herring ground,
where the gulls were screaming and the porpoises dancing through the
short foamy waves, but still the sky was cold and lowering, and the
sea was inky black; yet though the breeze was freshening, they shot
their net, with inward hopes and a half muttered prayer--for they are
pious souls, those hardy Scottish fishers--that a night of success
might reward a day of toil amid the drenching spray.

Their boat, the _Mary_--for so she was fondly named--they denuded of
her sail, and hooked on to the net, allowing her thus to drift before
wind and tide.  They were the farthest off shore, for more than a
hundred boats were all drifting in the same fashion, between them and
the land.

Night came on, and to prevent any chance of their being run down,
each boat's crew lit their dim horn lantern; then a quaighful of
whiskey went round; and still the darkness deepened on the silent
sea; still the boats drifted by their heavy nets, and still the
breeze was freshening from afar.

Midnight came.

Black, dense, and furious, a gust came with it--a fierce and heavy
squall, sheer from the icy north, that scattered all the little fleet
and nearly swamped the boat of Gair.

It was the turn of the tide now, and from their fishing ground a
strong current runs from the north-north-east towards St. Andrew's
stormy bay, and all along that bleak and iron shore.

"Awa' wi' the net, Jamie!" cried old John o' the Buddon-ness,
furiously, through the roaring wind and hissing sea; and he held up a
hand to the side of his mouth.

Jamie lingered, for the sacrifice was great.

"Awa' wi't!" cried John; "awa' wi't, or the boat is swamped in a
minnit mair!"

Jamie sprang to the leeward gunnel, knife in hand, and a sore pang
shot through his heart, as he thought of the unpaid twine bill--for
he yet owed the price of the net to the rope-makers in Tindall's
Wynd; but go it must.  One slash of the knife, and net and floats,
with all their scaly cargo, were swept away like a gossamer web.
Half the boat-lanterns around them were tumbling hither and thither
on the crests of the waves, or deep in the trough of the sea; the
other half had vanished, for many a boat had gone down with all her
hands on board!

And now nothing can save their frail shallop but running before the
wind, and the close-reefed foresail strains on the mast of tough
Scottish larch as it lifts the boat of the bold fisherman over each
hoarse wave of that black and gurly sea.

Nor kith nor kin has poor John o' the Buddon-ness to weep for him, if
his corpslicht dances on the waves to-morrow night; for his father
and seven brethren had all perished at sea.

Jamie thought of Mary and of their babe--of the broken ring--of the
lost nets, and of his older friend's foreboding, and their present
danger; and, while his strong heart swelled with agony, his iron
hands grasped the wet tiller, and kept the lug-sail full.

On, on flew the sharp boat before that furious wind; and now faint
lights were seen to twinkle amid the darkness and the flying scud to
starboard; then the poor Scottish fishermen, while tears of hope and
reliance mingled with the bitter spray that drenched their faces, put
their trust in God and St. Andrew, and a hope arose that all might
yet go well; for those lights were twinkling in the aisles of that
glorious cathedral church upon the promontory--the work of a hundred
and fifty years; and their prayers were heard; for morning came, and
still their boat was sea-worthy, and as the dawn brightened, both sea
and wind went down; the water was covered with foam--but not a trace
was seen of that little fleet, among which they had shot their nets
over-night.

As the sun rose through a hazy veil of vapour, Jamie found the Isle
of May lying right a-head, and discovered that he had been blown far
past Fife-ness, for now the distant spire of Crail and the faint blue
Craig of Kilmeinie were gilded by the rising beams; and, now that all
danger of being drowned was past, Jamie thought bitterly of his
losses over-night.

Toil-worn and disappointed, the two fishermen were about to haul up
for the shore and run into Crail Harbour, when the sudden apparition
of three large vessels, under easy sail, bearing straight towards
them, from under the lee of the Isle of May, where doubtless they had
lain secure all night at anchor, arrested their attention; for at a
glance Gair and John o' Buddon-ness perceived they were English
ships, heavily armed and full of men.

These vessels were little more than a mile distant, and the fishermen
knew that a run of four miles would bring them into the nearest
harbour, where their boat--their little all--would be safe.  The time
was one of truce between the two countries; but recent events had
proved that the warlike skippers of King Henry were not
over-particular in respecting strangers at sea.

The breeze was still fresh and keen; the fishers stepped their mast,
hoisted so much of their lug-sail as they dared, and, favoured by a
side wind, bore away for Crail; but one of the English caravels
followed them, and only a short time elapsed before a puff of smoke
curled from her bows, and a cannon-shot boomed over the water close
by, and plunging into the slope of a wave, raised it like a spout
ahead of the boat.

"Ablins, they lack a pilot, Jamie," said John o' the Buddon-ness;
"let us lie-to; they canna' hae the hearts to harm twa puir dyvour
shields like you and me."

"May my een melt in their sockets when I undertake to pilot an
Englishman!" said Jamie; "but by my certie, here comes another
shot--douk doon, John, douk doon!"

This time it was the ball of an arquebuse, levelled through an iron
sling attached to the ratlins.

The warning words had scarcely left Jamie's lips before the boat
yawed round furiously, and his poor old companion fell dead across
the thwart, for the same bullet that cut the halyard had pierced his
heart, and in another minute the startled Gair found the English ship
cleaving the billows close by him, and her hull towering from the sea
as her mainyard was backed, and she lay to.

"Come on hoard, thou rascally Scot," cried a voice; "and marry! come
quickly, lest we fire again!"

"Fling me owre a rope, then," replied Jamie, who, but for the sake of
Mary, would have jumped overboard rather than obeyed.

A rope was thrown to him, and in another moment he found himself
standing on the deck of the stately ship commanded by Sir Stephen
Bull, and he was roughly dragged before that portly commander, who
appeared in half armour at the door of the poop, which contained the
principal cabins.

"Thou hast given us trouble enough, in all conscience, fellow!" said
he, angrily; "why laid ye not to?"

"Because Sir Andrew Wood is not in these waters; the ships of Sir
William Merrimonth and John Barton are all in the western seas, and
we have none to protect us now," said Gair, with a sigh of bitterness
as he looked after his boat, now cut adrift and tossing on the sea
with the dead body of his companion in it.

"Ah! and so Sir Andrew Wood is not in the seas?"

"No, sir; but is daily expected," said Gair, spitefully.

"Good," said Sir Stephen, with a smile of gratification on his broad
and bearded face; "that is the reason, Scot, which brings us here."

"I pray you to release me, gude sir," implored Jamie, as he stood,
bonnet in hand, amid a circle of armed Londoners, who stared at the
"rough-footed Scot" as if he had been a wild animal; "I am but a puir
fisher carle, wi' a wife and a wean to support in these hard times of
civil war and trouble; I lost my nets yesternicht in the squall, and
ye have cut my boat adrift this morning--I am a ruined man!" he
added, as he almost wept in the agony of his spirit.

"A ruined man, indeed! so much the better for our purpose, perhaps,"
said Sir Stephen Bull, with an icy smile; "wouldst know the ships of
Sir Andrew Wood if you saw them now?"

"Yes, sir, as well as my ain cottage lum."

"Cottage what, sirrah?"

"Lum, sir; lum."

"'Tis well," said Bull, turning to Captain Edmund Howard, who had
recognised the poor fisherman of Broughty-point, and who had been
standing somewhat aloof; "let this man be well watched, and call me
the moment a sail appears in sight; for Scot though he be, his eyes
may serve us here better than our own."

"But he may escape," suggested Howard, who half hoped he would.

"Escape! nay, nay; let his legs be secured in fetterlocks, then he'll
not drag his anchor, I warrant."

Strictly guarded, Jamie was kept for three days on board of the
_Unicorn_, the ship of Bull; and though he knew not exactly for what
purpose, he feared it would prove of no good ultimately to himself.
In these three days which succeeded the midnight storm, what would be
the thoughts, the surmises of poor Mary, and how great would be her
terror at his disappearance; how much greater, too, if his boat was
picked up, or cast ashore, with the body of his slaughtered friend in
it!  The poor man covered his brown visage with his rough hands, and
endeavoured to shut out sight, sound, and reflection, but such
thoughts would come again and again.

Edmund Howard treated him with the greatest kindness, and endeavoured
to raise his drooping spirits by promises that he would soon be set
on shore, with gold sufficient to buy ten such boats and nets as
those he had lost; but Jamie ever replied,--

"Na--na, sir; I want nane o' your siller, for English gold works
Scotland ever dule and wae; and may my fingers be blistered if I
touch it!"

Then Howard questioned him about the family of Lord Drummond; but
Jamie could only say that "it was commonly bruited abroad that his
daughter, the Lady Margaret, the king's gude cousin, was to be Queen
of Scotland, and that a winsome young pair they would be."

Had honest Jamie Gair been less occupied by his own thoughts than he
was, he could not have failed to observe how these tidings--though
expected, sank into poor Howard's brave and noble heart.

Meanwhile the English ships never molested the coast, for it was not
the purpose of Sir Stephen Bull to create an alarm, so he continued
to cruise off the mouth of the Firth, within a space of twenty miles
or so, running southward as far as Dunbar, and northward as far as
the Carr Rock; but generally hovering about the Isle of May, to the
great anxiety and discomposure of the secluded priests of Pittenweem,
who dwelt thereon, and traded by shipping with France and the Baltic.

About dawn, on the fourth day after Jamie's misadventure, two large
vessels were descried at the horizon, like black specks, for the
clear streak of the coming day was astern of them, and their outline
was darkly and strongly defined.  They loomed large; and from the
lofty poop of the _Unicorn_ Sir Stephen Bull reconnoitred them with
some anxiety, for the Scottish admiral was said to have but two ships
with him; and so he despatched a boat to the vessel of Miles le
Furnival, to bring on board the Scottish spy he had brought with him
from London.

"Is it _thee_, thou hell-begotten wretch?" exclaimed Howard, as Hew
Borthwick, gaily attired, stepped confidently along the deck of the
very ship which had been captured by his treachery; "by St. Paul, I
would give something handsome to see thee rove up to the
foreyard-arm!"

Borthwick gave the speaker a dark and furtive glance, but made no
reply.

"Thou art sure, sirrah, that Andrew Wood hath but two ships with
him?" asked Stephen Bull, imperiously, contempt and scorn curling his
full, ruddy lip as he spoke.

"Sure as I have now the honour of addressing you."

"Wouldst know them if ye saw them?"

"Not unless within half-a-mile or so."

"That were somewhat too close for my purpose," said Bull; "remove
this shabby lubber, this skulking lurdane, from the quarterdeck, and
bring aft the fisherman."

Borthwick, who had repeatedly begged to be placed ashore, but in
vain, was now roughly removed, and poor Jamie Gair, with his legs
stiff by four days' and nights' retention in fetter-locks, was
brought before Sir Stephen Bull, around whom all his officers and
gentlemen volunteers were crowding, with kindling eyes and open ears.

"Wouldst thou know the ships of Sir Andrew Wood, sirrah?" asked Sir
Stephen, whose pages were arming him in a brilliant coat of mail.

"Weel as I wad ken the dear face o' my ain wife!" replied the
prisoner, with ardour and sadness.

"Never mind thy wife's face, Scot; but answer me."

"So far an honest man may, I will, sir."

"Then, are these his vessels--away there to windward?"

Gair looked there for a moment; his eyes flashed and his cheek
reddened; but he hung his head with an emotion which did not escape
the keen and penetrating eyes of the English captain.

"Speak, sirrah!" said he, imperiously, as he grasped his poniard.

"They are hull down, sir."

"Well, but ye may know the trim of his sails, and the fashion of his
gear aloft."

"I--I dinna ken, sir."

"Answer me, fellow, at once; are these, or are they _not_, the
caravels of Sir Andrew of Largo?"

"I am no free to say."

"Trifle not; answer me at once, or, by the head of King Henry, I will
lash you at the gunner's daughter, and fling you overboard after!"

"I daurna trifle, noble sir, I who am but a pair fisherman, with you
an armed knight; but I too can swear, and by the head of King James,
I sall rather dee than tell ye."

"Then die, fellow!" said the knight, furiously; "Dick Selby, tie a
ball to his heels, and trice him by the armpits up to the yard-arm;
while there, he will have a better view of these coming craft.  Knot
the rope round in a fisherman's bend--he may like it the better."

It was all done in the time we have taken to write it; the ball of a
carthoun--about thirty-six pounds in weight--was attached to his
ankles, which were tied together; a rope was passed round his body,
and he was run up to the arm of the maintopsail-yard, where he hung
with outspread hands.  A shudder, but partly subdued by anger at his
obstinacy, passed over all on deck.  A culverin was prepared, and the
seamen in the waist, who had "triced" the poor fisherman up, held in
their hands the line on which his life depended.

"Answer me now, Scot--are yonder craft the ships of Sir Andrew Wood?"
cried Stephen Bull, who was a stern and uncompromising, as well as a
cunning and reckless man; "answer!"

"Never," cried Gair, "though ye should wrench me bone frae bone!"

"You may as well tell the truth," said Howard, "and save your life,
for it will be all the same for your admiral in the end."

"I ne'er say aucht but truth," replied Gair; "but ye sall get nae
information frae me."

"Then take thy last look of yonder rising sun, my brave fellow," said
Howard, with deep commiseration; "for in one minute more thou'lt be
lying at the bottom of thy native sea."

"Oh, my sakeless wife and bairn!" cried the poor fisherman: "but in
life and death, I commit you to the care of God!"

These words struck a chill on all who heard them, and the brave
English gentlemen and mariners of Bull grew pale as they looked on
each other.

Twice Sir Stephen repeated the question, and on receiving, for the
last time, the same reply, he cried, furiously,--

"Thy blood be on thine own head, fellow!--fire the gun!"

The white smoke gushed from the gunport through the black rigging;
the sharp report pealed over the morning sea, and ere it died away
the rope had whistled through the block, as the sailors cast it from
them like an instrument of murder, and poor Jamie Gair had vanished
from the yard-arm of the _Unicorn_.

"Oh, Sir Stephen Bull," cried Howard, as he rushed to the vessel's
side; "what is this thou hast done?"

"Drowned a pitiful Scot, whose obstinacy may mar our morning's work,"
was the dogged reply, as a few bubbles that rose to the surface, were
all that remained to show where the fisherman had sunk.  Sir Stephen
walked aft hastily, but was evidently dissatisfied with himself, for
he returned, and said,--

"Why this regret, Edmund Howard; was not the man only a Scot?"

"For that reason I commiserate his fate the more," said Howard, who
was no doubt thinking of Lady Margaret Drummond.

"Tush! display the signal to clear away for battle, and hoist the
French ancient, for I have no doubt these are the ships of him we are
in search of.  If they were not, our defunct fisherman would soon
have said so."

"God will not bless the course we thus begin," said Howard; "and if
yonder ships are indeed those of Sir Andrew Wood, the weepers of
Saint John, by London Wall, will be singing dirges for some of us ere
long."

"I care little whether or not God blesses it, if Henry our king is
pleased," said Sir Stephen, with a glance of pride and anger; "but
peace with this croaking, Sir Captain of mine--'tis a new thing in
thee.  To your arms and to your quarters, fore and aft--sound
trumpets, and load culverins and arquebusses!  Dick Selby, open the
magazine; John o'Lynne, see the fire's out; beat to quarters, and get
abroach three runlets of canary.  Fight to the death, my merry men
all, for if you fall into the hands of the Scots they will chain you
to work on their castles and highways, and feed you worse than
Charterhouse monks--so every man to quarters, and St. George for
Merry England!"




CHAPTER LXIV.

THE BATTLE OFF FIFENESS.

  "Were ye twentye shippes, and he but one,
    I swear by kirke, and bower, and hall,
  He wolde overcome them everye one,
    If once his beames they doe downefall.
  This is colde comfort, quoth my lorde,
    To welcome a stranger thus to sea;
  But I'll bring him and his ships to shore;
    Or to Scotland he shall carry me."--SIR ANDREW BARTON


After nearly bringing to a successful issue his diplomatic mission
concerning the quarrel between the Scottish, Dutch, and Flemish
merchants,--though the latter remembered bitterly the various barrels
of pickled heads despatched by the unquhile Sir Andrew Barton to the
Privy Council of James III.,--Sir Andrew Wood had left the port of
Sluys, or Sluice, which is one of the best harbours and strongest
frontier towns in Dutch Flanders, and from the Bailiff and Echevins
of which he received a gold cup and silken banner.  Sailing with a
fair wind, he soon lost sight of the low flat shores of Batavia, and
bore away for the Firth of Forth.

The voyage across the northern ocean was rough, and more than once
his Scottish caravels rolled their lower yard-arms in the water; but
their trip of five hundred miles was drawing to a close, and on the
morning mentioned in the preceding chapter, the crews of the _Flower_
and _Yellow Frigate_ hailed with satisfaction the black rugged scalp
of St. Abb, as it rose above the summer sea.

The _Flower_ was commanded by Sir Alexander Mathieson, "the Auld King
o' the Sea," whose former ship, the _Margaret_, had been given by the
young king to John, the younger brother of Robert Barton.  John was
also a brave mariner, and well known in Scottish history.

The vessels were going under easy sail; morning prayers were over;
the crew were lying in groups between the guns on deck, resting
themselves after the recent gale.  Willie Wad was playing on the
fiddle; Father Zuill was of course engaged in the further development
of his parabolic speculum; the admiral was writing in his cabin;
Falconer and Barton were on deck, talking no doubt over the chances
of good or evil tidings awaiting them from the fair daughters of Lord
Drummond, and of their aversion for the new Lord High Admiral of
Scotland--Hailes, now Earl of Bothwell; old Archy, the boatswain, was
"spinning a yarn" to some idlers who were clustered near the capstan,
and assuring them that in some parts of the Northern Sea, he knew
with certainty there was a fiend who was often seen astride the
bowsprit or the spritsail-yard on the eve of a hurricane, with blue
flames coming out of his hawseholes, and wearing a conical hat tipped
with fire; and there he rode, leading the vessel to destruction; for
if the storm was weathered, she would run into the down-hill at the
back of the world, where she might beat and tack in vain, for her
crew could never gather leeway until the day of doom.  This, and much
more to the same purpose, was listened to, in the most perfect good
faith by the hearers, and was corroborated by some of them, who had
seen the identical demon referred to, when they were wrecked near the
English Castle of Barnborough in '72, in the great ship of James
Kennedy, Bishop of St. Andrew's, when all perished, save a few who
escaped in a jollyboat with the holy Abbot of Inchcolm, whose case of
reliques--but at that moment a voice was hailing the deck.

"Hollo," cried Barton, "who hails?"

"Captain of the maintop, sir--sail ho!"

"Sail ho!" was echoed from the deck.

"Why, thou gomeral, there is nothing wonderful in seeing a sail off
St. Abb's Head."

"But there are three o' them, Sir Captain," cried the sailor, looking
over the basket-work of the top; "war-ships to my eye."

"Oho--that alters the case entirely!"

Barton sprung into the main-rigging, and ran up aloft to take a view;
when he descended, the admiral, whom some rumour had reached, was on
deck.

"What dost make them out to be, Robert?"

"Three full-rigged ships, standing straight towards us; coming down
with a fine breeze, and everything set aloft that will catch it."

"Didst make out their colours?"

"They have none hoisted as yet; but by St. Andrew, they are
war-ships, or I have the eyes of a mole!"

"They may be English----"

"Or Portuguese caravels on some roving commission; but both are alike
dangerous.  To be forewarned is to be forearmed."

"Right," said the admiral; "so beat the starboard watch to quarters;
Willie Wad, out with all lights, and open the magazine!  To your
armour, gentlemen; Sir David Falconer, order your trumpeter to sound,
and line the poop with arquebussiers."

"That puff of smoke," said Falconer, as he buckled on his splendid
baldrick, "is very like the discharge of a culverin."

And such it was, being the death-knell of Jamie Gair, the unfortunate
fisherman.

As the vessels neared each other, the two Scottish caravels were
cleared for action, and every man armed himself; the cannon was
served with shot and powder; the arquebussiers manned the tops and
taffrails; the cannoniers stood by their guns, with tackle, sponge,
and rammer; the lines were laid along the deck, and the ports were
triced up.

"By my soul, Robert Barton," said the admiral, as he scanned the
strangers; "I think I should know the hull of yonder craft and the
rake of her masts.  Gadzooks! look at her now, as her sails lift in
the breeze."

"And the fashion of her topsails, too," said Barton, observing her
with kindling eyes, and a darkening brow.

"'Tis the _Unicorn_--as I am a living man!"

"Either thy father's spirit, or an English foe, is under sail on
these waters.  It _is_ the _Unicorn_, Robert.  But hah--what is this?
Up goeth her pennon and ensign.  French, gadzooks!  Now what may this
portend?"

"'Tis all a wile," said Barton, as Sir Stephen Bull, the further to
deceive them, as he hoped, hoisted the white flag with the
fleur-de-lis, a flag then as familiar to the Scottish people as their
own; and as the oriflamme swelled out in the breeze, Sir Stephen
fired a gun to leeward.

"Up with St. Andrew's cross," said the admiral; "if these are not
three English ships, may I skulk in the lee scuppers of fortune to
the end of my days.  Up with our ancient, quartermaster; and Wad,
fire a gun to _windward_."

It is recorded, that immediately on the hostile signal being given,
the oriflamme went down, and up went the white flag with the red
cross of England, while the bright heraldic pennons of the many
gentlemen who served in the ships for glory and honour, or in sheer
hatred of the Scots, were displayed in the bright sunshine.  The
adverse ships, now about half a mile apart, were nearing each other
fast, and every heart on board beat high.

In our account of this battle, we will follow briefly and strictly
the relation of Dalzel, Pitcairn, Buchanan, the Laird of Pitscottie,
and others.  The quaint chronicler Lindesay gives us the
characteristic address of his contemporary, the Scottish admiral to
his crew, while every man received a stoup of wine at the
capstan-head.

"My lads, these are the men who would seek to convey us in fetters to
the foot of an English king as they did the shipmates of stout old
Andrew Barton; but, by the help of God and your bravery, they shall
fail!  Shipmates, set yourselves in order; every man to his station;
the gunner to his lintstock, and the steersman to his helm!  Charge
home, cannoniers--crossbowmen, to the tops--pikes and two-handed
swords to the forerooms.  Down with the bulk-heads, up with the
screens, reeve tackle, and ram home.  Be stout men and true, for the
love of your kindred, and the honour of old Scotland--hurrah!"

A loud cheer responded; the poops, tops, and forecastles were
bristling with cuirassed and helmeted men; the yeomen of the sheets
and braces stood by their stations, the gunners by their guns, and
all were armed to the teeth, with swords and daggers, pikes, axes,
ghisarmas, and hand-cannons.

The sun was clear and the sky brilliant; the waves rolled like
crystal in long glassy swells; the bellying canvas was white as snow,
and the gaudy pennons waved from mast-head and yard-arm, like long
ribands of many coloured silk on the gentle wind.  The sides of all
the ships, but more especially their towering poops and ponderous
quarter-galleries, were gay with carving and gilding, and grim with
the flashing of sharp weapons and the brass-mouthed tiers of their
pointed artillery; and a thousand bright or gaily tinted objects were
thus reflected in the clear waves as they rolled past in slow heaving
ridges that glistened in the sun.

In a few minutes the guns of Bull commenced firing, and their balls
whistled through the rigging of the _Yellow Frigate_ as she closed
up, but without firing a shot, for, breathless and impatient, her
crew were waiting for the sound of the admiral's whistle.

One ball splintered the mizenmast near Sir Andrew, and another
stretched Cuddie Clewline, his coxswain, on the deck.

"My poor Cuddie," said he, rushing forward; "how art thou, old
shipmate?"

"Ill enough, Sir Andrew," groaned the seaman, from the sleeve of
whose doublet the blood was gushing; "my best spar is knocked away."

"Poor carle--thy right arm?" said Barton.

"Never fear ye for me, sirs, I'll weather the gale yet," he answered,
as he crawled along the deck, leaving a long trail of blood, till he
reached the main hatchway, where Father Zuill, relinquishing an
immense parabolic speculum, received him in his arms, and conveyed
him below.

"Hollo!  Saints and angels, what clattering is that?" he asked, as a
heavy shot tore its way between decks.

"An English bullet through the magazine," said some one.

"Damnation," cried Wad, plunging down the ladder to ascertain the
damage.

"Peace," said the chaplain; "swear not, friend gunner; it is
forbidden."

"The shot is through thy laboratory, Father Zuill," said the
boatswain, ascending; "and if it hasna smashed your hurdy-gurdy to
flinders, may I never mair see Anster kirk!"

"Hell's fury! sayst thou so?" cried the chaplain, losing all
patience, as another of King Henry's pills came crashing through the
timbers, killing and wounding all in its way.

"Oho! may I drink bilge but a friar can swear as well as a poor
gunner, though it is forbidden," said Willie Wad, as he hoisted up
case after case of shot; but the unhappy chaplain, rendered furious
by the destruction of his lifelong labours, flung off his frock,
under which he wore a jazarine jacket, seized a sword, and rushed on
deck intent on vengeance.

The _Yellow Frigate_ and the _Unicorn_ were now less than a musket
shot apart, when Sir Andrew blew his silver whistle; and then the
former poured her broadside of "pestilent" carthouns, sakers, and
serpentines, into the latter, exchanging fire with her on opposite
tacks, while the arquebussiers and crossbowmen aloft and below
volleyed at each other as fast as they could cast their weapons about.

"By the soul of King James, that broadside will cost ye a few bolts
of canvas, my friends!" said Wood, with a smile; and bearing on, by
his great seamanship he continued to keep the weather-gage of Bull;
while Sir Alexander Mathieson, with the _Flower_, followed close in
his wake, they each exchanged broadsides with the three English
ships, whose triple fire cut up their rigging, battered their gay
bulwarks, and wounded a vast number of their men; but few were
killed, though all the scuppers ran with blood and water.

These brave adversaries foresaw not the days that were to come, when
"Duncan, Nelson, Keppel, Howe, and Jervis," under a _united_ flag,
would lead their descendants side by side to sweep Scotland's ancient
ally from the ocean.

"Tack," cried the admiral to Barton, again, as the cannon were
charged for the fourth time; "tack again, and range up on the weather
quarter of the sternmost ship."

By this manoeuvre he almost blew to pieces the poop of Miles
Furnival's caravel; he then gave the order to "close in and grapple."

"A narrow escape, David," said Barton, as an English bullet tore the
crest off Falconer's headpiece.

"A little lower, and it would have ended all my cares to-day,"
replied Sir David, with a sad smile; "and believe me, Barton, I would
rather die here than land to-morrow, and learn that Sybilla has
become the countess of the high-admiral."

The five vessels now simultaneously shortened sail, and, according to
the tactics of the day, grappled with each other; and there was a
frightful rasping as they closed-in muzzle to muzzle with their
yard-arms tearing each other's canvas to rags and ribbons.

Alas! we need scarcely advert to the _desperation_ of the conflict
which ensued--a conflict from which we recoil; for it was Englishmen
and Scotsmen who then fought against each other, and fought as they
alone can fight.

The yetlan guns soon became so hot that Wad reported to the admiral,
"that they were bouncing off their stocks, and tearing their
breechings like pack-thread."

We are told that, fearless of the numerical force and superiority of
the enemy, old Andrew Wood led the way to the "Inglish deckis with
his twa-handed quhinger," and that for twelve hours, with sword and
pike, crossbow and battle-axe, a deadly conflict was maintained; and
that they had often to retire from sheer exhaustion, and to free
their blood-stained decks from the dead and wounded; "and there they
fought," saith Pitscottie, who knew the admiral well, "frae the
rising of the sun till the going down of the same, in the long
summer's day, while all the men and women that dwelt near the
coast-side stood and beheld the fighting, which was terrible to see."

The sun sank behind the hills of Fife, and those persons who crowded
on the steeple of Crail and the summit of Kincraig, saw the five
grappled ships abandoned to the wind and current, drifting off
towards the north.  They saw the blue flag of Scotland and the white
English ensign floating side by side; they could see the incessant
gleaming of steel, and the pale smoke that broke upward in white
curls from time to time, but they knew not how the tide of battle
turned, or to whom red Victory held out her bloody wreath.

Night came down on the echoing deep, and when morning dawned the good
folk of the East Neuk, pale with watching, and fired by expectation,
could see no trace of the hostile ships; for by that time they had
drifted like a huge and gory raft, or a floating hecatomb, to the
mouth of the Tay.  There, after casting off to refit and reeve anew
their cut and torn rigging, again the trumpets sounded, and again
they grappled at sunrise; and Wood ordered that the English ships
should be lashed "with cables" to his own--that they should all go
down together rather than any one should escape.

The Scots and English were repeatedly in possession of each other's
decks, and incredible valour was exhibited in the many hand-to-hand
conflicts that ensued amid the general _mêlée_; many a Scottish
mariner was "spritsail yarded," as they termed it, by being pinned in
the head or breast by the clothyard shafts of Sir Stephen's archers,
who shot from the tops and poops; and many an Englishman was
_scotched_ (i.e., cut or slashed by the sword or Jedwood axe), a
phrase we first find in Shakespeare, but which had long previously
been common in England, for a wound received in the Scottish wars.

Tall Dick Selby, with his poleaxe, displayed to advantage the agility
and prowess which made him the lion of the Moorfields and Finsbury;
and strong in the belief of a blessed Paternoster, bought in the Row
beside St. Paul's, and bound about his better wrist, he had hewed a
way almost to the poop of the _Yellow Frigate_, when he was killed by
Sir David Falconer, who there recognised Edmund Howard fighting
bravely against great odds, and keeping his back to the mizenmast;
and there, after doing all in his power by voice and deed to save
him, he had the mortification of seeing him hewn almost to pieces by
the crew of the _Flower_.

Sir Fulke of Fulkeshall was also slain, and there was scarcely a
noble or wealthy family in London that did not lose a relative in
this desperate conflict.

Sir Stephen Bull, tall, powerful, and brave as a Hector, sought
everywhere for old Sir Andrew Wood, reserving his sword and strength
for him alone; and they encountered each other no less than six
times, but were always separated by the furious pressure of those
around them; for Miles le Furnival, John of Lynne, and others, on one
side, Sir Alexander Mathieson, Robert Barton, and Falconer, on the
other, were always rushing on, and taking part in the bloody game,
though all of them were severely wounded, and covered with blood and
bandages.

"Had we no better cast off the grapples," cried Archy of Anster,
rushing to the admiral, who was leaning, breathless, against the
taffrail of the _Unicorn_, with his sword in his hand.

"Wherefore?" he asked.

"We are close on the Buddon-ness--in shoal water," exclaimed the
boatswain; "and will strike in three minutes or less."

"Let us take our chance," answered Wood, grimly; "I will rather knock
the old ship to pieces than see her an English prize; but, alas!
honest Archy--art thou wounded?"

"My mainyard is shot in the slings," groaned the old boatswain, as a
ball struck him near the shoulder, and he fell heavily on the deck,
with his right arm broken.

At that moment, there was a tremendous shock; the masts nodded like
willow wands, and several topmasts with all their yards, sails,
rigging, and hamper, came thundering down on the still contested
decks; and then a hoarse shout of rage and despair arose from the
English ships, for their crews were aware that they were all ashore,
or wedged on the shoaly sands together.

To shorten this account, which, as it may be found in many old
histories of Scotland, need not be longer dwelt on here, the English
trumpets sounded a parley, and the brave Sir Stephen Bull, now
thoroughly crestfallen and dejected, surrendered his sword to Sir
Andrew Wood; but without shame or dishonour, for he and his crews had
done all that brave men might do.

The ships were all floated off by the flood tide; the grapplings cut,
jury masts were rigged, and sails set on them, and before midnight
they were all safely anchored in the harbour of Dundee, within the
protection of the cannon of Broughty.




CHAPTER LXV.

THE ENGLISH PRISONERS.

  "Sir Stephen, who was prisoner made
    With ships and sailors all,
  Unto King James Sir Andrew took,
    Before his feet to fall."
                      SIR ANDREW WOOD.--_Old Ballad_.


The tidings of this victory, notwithstanding the slaughter by which
it was gained, caused the greatest rejoicings over all Scotland, for
her people were proud of their country, and were then sensitively
jealous of her honour; thus, the excitement in Dundee, on the day
after the battle, was tremendous.

Sir Andrew Wood took Sir Stephen Bull, and all the officers and
English gentlemen volunteers ashore, to present them to King James
IV.  When the barge of this fine old Scottish mariner left the ships,
the seamen of the _Yellow Frigate_ and _Flower_ swarmed up the
rigging, manned the yards, and gave him three hearty cheers.

"God bless ye, my brave callants," said the good admiral, as he stood
up in the boat, bowed his silvery head, and waved his blue bonnet.

A similar greeting awaited him at the rock of St. Nicholas, and in
the streets of Dundee, where, giving his arm in token of amity to his
late adversary, the haughty and resentful Stephen Bull, and followed
by the principal prisoners, and surrounded by Falconer's
arquebussiers, to guard them from insult, he went straight to the
little palace of St. Margaret, where the young king, who had been
apprised of his coming, awaited him.  Vast crowds followed the
vanquished and the victors; the lances of the Provost guarded them,
and in front rode the Laird of Blackness, bearing the banner of the
Burgh, argent, with a pot of lilies, or--the emblem of the
Virgin--supported by two green dragons, with enormous twisted tails;
and many an unsophisticated Englishman, who had never seen a Scot
before, gazed about him with emotions of wonder and hostility; for
the towns and dresses of the Lowlanders were very different from
those of the English, to whom the architecture of the Scottish
streets and houses has still a strange and foreign aspect.  In those
days, the peasantry of the Lowlands all wore rough brogues of
deerskin, with the hair outwards; hence they were named rough-footed
Scots by the people of England, where the peasantry were all
barefooted, and even bare-legged, as some writers of the time of
James IV. say.

Accompanied by the venerable Duke of Montrose-Crawford, the young
Lord Lindesay, in his scarlet mantle, and his tall mother, the
Duchess, by Robert Lord Lyle, and many other friends of his unhappy
father, mingled with a few of the Angus faction, James IV., with his
half-acknowledged queen by his side, received the victorious admiral
and his bold prisoners in one of the finest chambers of this old
country palace.

The walls were hung with green and gold arras; the oak ceiling was
divided into square compartments, and in the centre of each was a
royal or heraldic device, the arms of the house of Stuart, of their
alliances with foreign reigning families, and their many ennobled
descendants.  Above the carved stone fireplace hung that celebrated
picture of the murdered James III., with his queen, in which he is
represented in a lilac-coloured robe, trimmed with ermine, and
wearing a vest of cloth of gold; Margaret of Oldenburg is attired in
a blue robe, with a Scottish kirtle of cloth of gold, and a
head-dress blazing with jewels.  This picture, which now hangs in
Kensington, is probably one of the many valuable portraits of which
the avaricious James VI. stripped the Scottish palaces, on his
succession to the English crown in 1603.

Crestfallen and silent, the proud and brave English captain stood
within this noble apartment.

James frankly and kindly shook the hand of the vanquished mariner,
and complimented him on his bravery, in terms similar to those with
which he favoured Wood.

"Sir Stephen," he added, "I will restore to you and to your followers
your swords, arms, and armour, your ships, and liberty, because I
ever love brave men who fight--not for gain--but for glory.  Go,
sirs, you are free; but I trust that never again you will trouble the
Scottish seas with your presence or your piracies, else another fate
may await you."

Before presenting his own officers and shipmates to their young
sovereign, Sir Andrew courteously introduced Miles de Furnival, John
o'Lynne, and all those Englishmen who had distinguished themselves
most in the recent battle; he also deplored the death of Captain
Edmund Howard; "for," said he, "he was a brave man, and a true
English seaman, whom I respected, though his brother, the admiral,
slew my old shipmate, Barton, on that day of sorrow in the Downs--but
woe is for women, and masses are for monks--the gunner to his
lintstock, and the steersman to his helm, say I."

Margaret Drummond heard these tidings with a pang, for the noble and
gentle Howard had won her whole esteem, though he could win nothing
more.

"Thou art so rich in honour, and, men say, in money too, Robert
Barton," said the king, "that I am sorely puzzled how to reward thy
bright career of faithful service; but thou shalt be the captain of
my _Great Michael_, as soon as that stately ship is launched and fit
for sea.  And as for thee, my honest Davie Falconer, the gentle and
the brave," he added, taking both Sir David's hands in his, "what
shall I say to thee?  As an earliest of better things, let me hang
this gold medal, the gift of our Holy Father Innocent VIII., to the
golden chain my father gave thee, when last we were all under this
old rooftree together.  May the good God bless thee, Davie Falconer;
for, on the last day of that poor father's life, thou didst fight
nobly by his side, where I too should have been, but for evil fortune
and most accursed counsel!"

Falconer's heart swelled with mingled joy and sadness as the young
king attached the medal to his chain, and he gazed imploringly at
Margaret Drummond, with an expression that seemed to say, "Oh, speak
for us--for Sybilla and for me--you know our secret well;" but terror
of her father, on whose face there was a scornful smile, repressed
any such thought in her mind.

"I have ever done my duty as a subject and a leal Scotsman," said
Falconer; "but in this presence I dare not say all I think, or all I
feel, lest the Lord Drummond and others deem me bold; for other
inheritance than my sword and an honest name, have I none."

"Nay, by my soul, David Falconer, Drummond will never deem thee
over-bold," said the old lord, with a sudden emotion of generosity,
"for the sword is ever the Scotsman's best, and often his _last_
inheritance, as many a foreign field can show; and well I know, that
it was not when treading on a silken carpet you won the spurs you
wear."

These were the first kind words the father of Sybilla had ever
addressed to him, and they raised in his warm heart a glow of hope
and gratitude.

That evening there was a grand banquet served up amid a flourish of
trumpets; Sir Stephen Bull sat on the king's right hand, the Laird of
Largo on his left; and the English and Scots, oblivious of
yesterday's strife and slaughter, pushed the stoups of Malmsey and
Rochelle, Canary and Bordeaux, as busily as of late they had plied
cannon and arquebuss, eghisarma and hand-gun.  Sir John Carmichael of
Netherton and Hyndford--the same who, with Swinton of Dalswinton,
slew the Duke of Clarence at the Battle of Verneuil--was chief
carver; the Laird of Southesk was cup-bearer, and the kirk bells of
"the Blessed Virgin Mary-in-the-fields" rang their matin-chime before
the carousers drank the voidée, or parting-cup--the signal for
retiring.

The dead were buried in two large graves, within the old cemetery of
St. Paul's Church, between the Sea Gate and the Murray Gate of
Dundee.  Sir Fulke of Fulkeshall was interred alone; and his remains,
with a large sword with the blade full of notches, and several silver
coins (which the Scots always interred with the dead--a strange
remnant of paganry) were found in a large stone coffin, when the
foundations of the East Church of Dundee were being dug in 1842; but
poor Howard had found a grave among the waves that dash upon the
shoals of the Buddon-ness.

In less than a week the English ships were refitted, and began to
drop down the Tay, to sail for London.

On Blue Peter being displayed at the masthead by Sir Stephen Bull,
and the fore-topsails being cast loose--announcing that they were
about to depart--the crews of all the Scottish war-ships, about
fifteen or twenty of which had now mustered near Dundee--manned the
yards, and gave them a parting cheer, while the Laird of Balgillo
saluted St. George's cross by a salvo of guns from the battlements of
Broughty; and thus they separated--those hostile ships--with farewell
compliments and mutual expressions of amity and good-will.

Bull had on board the Montrose Herald and Garioch Pursuivant, who
were the bearers of a letter to King Henry.

This document demanded the immediate release of the Bishop of
Dunblane, and begged Henry to accept of his own ships back again as
presents, and enjoined him to reward nobly the brave men who had
fought them so skilfully and well; and also recommended him to
remember for the future, "that Scotland could boast of warlike sons
by sea as well as land, and that he--King James--trusted the
piratical shipmen of England would disturb his coasts no more, for it
micht be, they would not be so weel entertained, nor loup hame so
dryshod."

King Henry (add Buchanan and Lindesay) dissembled his anger and
mortification, saying that he "accepted the kindness of the young
King of Scotland, and could not but applaud the greatness and the
chivalry of his soul."

The Nethertoun of Largo was bestowed by James upon the Admiral,
together with the Green Ribbon of the Thistle, an Order in which the
death of the loyal Glencairn at Sauchieburn had made a vacancy; for
this naval victory, on which innumerable ballads were made, was of
infinite consequence to Scotland, as it spread abroad the terror of
her name by sea, at a time when the warlike skippers of France,
England, Portugal, and Spain, when sailing in their lumbering
argosies, with their cumbrous tops and gigantic poop-lanterns, were
not over-particular in distinguishing friends from foes, when they
met each other, far from human aid or justice, on the broad and open
arena of the ocean.




CHAPTER LXVI.

THE STONE BICKER.

  "Contempt on the minion who calls you disloyal!
    Though fierce to your foe, to your friends you are true;
  And the tribute most high to a head that is royal,
    Is love from a heart that loves liberty too."--MOORE.


Everything being quiet now, at home and abroad, Lord Drummond
proposed the completion of his old arrangement for wedding his
daughters to Home and Bothwell, and as the Bishop of Dunblane was
returning through England,--ready excuses having been found for his
unlawful detention,--the scheming and ambitious old noble
contemplated a grand and triple ceremony; the coronation of one
daughter and the marriage of the other two, and spent much of his
time among monks, minstrels, heralds, and other devisers of
pageantries.

Henry had released the poor Bishop, and satisfied him that his
detention had been all a mistake; and in proof thereof, committed his
secretary of state to the Tower--craved the reverend Father's
blessing, kissed his episcopal ring, and so forth, and thus dismissed
him with all honour; but, cunning as a lynx, and still following the
insidious policy of his family and his time, he hourly expected
tidings from Shaw, from Gray, or Borthwick, of whom more anon; for
that worthy had contrived to keep himself concealed in the ship of
Bull during the engagement, having not the slightest interest in its
issue, and feeling only a laudable spirit of economy with regard to
risking his own precious person.  Thus, on the ship's anchoring off
Dundee, favoured by the darkness and confusion, he lowered himself
into the water by one of the starboard gunports, swam safely ashore,
and made his way with all speed to the house of the traitor Gray of
Kyneff, which lay several miles distant, beyond the Howe of Angus,
and there he remained for some time in concealment and consultation.

Brown autumn came; the birchen leaves turned yellow in the russet
woods of Angus; the hills looked dark and close at hand; the black
corbie and the greedy gled croaked on the fauld dykes and on the bare
branches of the loftiest trees, and the swallows had long since
departed on their yearly journey to the sunny lands of the South.

All taut and trim as ever, the _Yellow Frigate_, with her carved and
painted sides that shone with gilding, still lay inactive in the
harbour of Dundee, with her long blue pennon dipping in the glassy
water alongside.

The Bishop of Dunblane (James Chisholm, chaplain to the late king)
had now reached his episcopal palace on the banks of the Allan Water,
and from Strathearn, Lord Drummond had brought his two beautiful
daughters, with a glittering escort, to Dundee; but now Home and
Bothwell, their intended spouses and their double terror, were
loitering on the borders, concerning some dispute in which they
had--fortunately for those in whom we are interested--became involved
with the Wardens of the English Marches.

Barton and Falconer hovered about the mansion of Lord Drummond, and
watched its walls, till they knew every stone in its quaint arcades
and broad round towers; they loitered in Tindall's Wynd and the
Fish-street daily--each like an Adam near his Eden; but never once,
at the windows, on the bartizan, nor in the street on foot or on
horseback, nor at church during morning mass or evening vespers, had
they been favoured by a sight of the sisters; neither did they
receive any message, which only convinced them how strictly the poor
girls were guarded, for Drummond of Mewie and a band of his men from
Strathearn garrisoned the house, and warded, like wakeful hounds,
every avenue to it.

In Dundee, in those days, there was a famous hostel and tavern, named
the Stone Bicker, which had been established by the provost and
magistrates in the time of James I., in obedience to the law of 1424,
which required all burgh-towns in the realm to have at least one
comfortable "hostellrie," with stables and chambers.  This was a
quaint old house, having many crow-stepped gables, square
ingle-chimneys, and deep shady galleries of wood, which stood upon
columns of stone.  Above its door was carved in stone a bicker--with
the legend,

  PAX INTRANTIBUS, 1424.


In form, this stoup or bicker was identically the same as that now
used in Scotland; and the name is derived from the same source as the
German _becher_.

Behind the house was a spacious green, smooth, grassy, and surrounded
by various little bowers trimmed over with Gueldre roses, sweetbriar,
and woodbine.  Here the soldiers of the king's guard, the cannoniers
of Broughty Castle, the seamen of the ships, pages of the court, and
other idlers--not a few of the latter, knights and
gentlemen--loitered and played, or observed others playing, at
long-bowls, at chess, or cards, or shooting at the butts with bow and
arquebuse, to encourage the use of which, James I. put down the games
of golf and foot-ball by act of parliament in 1424.

On a warm evening about the end of August, Barton and Falconer sat
moodily over a stoup of Bordeaux, in one of these bowers: close by
them on the green was a knot of their sailors, lounging at full
length, drinking ale from pewter flagons of that form which we find
still retained in the metal gill and mutchkin stoups in Scotland:
they were all talking and laughing with their bonnets off and
gaberdines unbuttoned, for they had just ended a tough game at bowls;
Cuddie Clewline, the coxswain, with his arm still in a sling, old
Archy of Anster, the boatswain, and Master Wad, the gunner, were
among them; and placing his short squat figure against a cask, Willie
began to scrape and screw up his fiddle, preparatory to favouring the
company with an air.

"How happy seem those honest souls of ours," said Falconer; "no
thought of to-day--and less care for the morrow."

"True, David; and all are happy whose wants and wishes, hopes and
ambition, are small--for contentment is great wealth."

"Hark," said Wad, lowering his fiddle-bow as a bell tolled; "what's
o'clock?"

"It is Sanct Clement's Kirk, but tak nae heed what's o'clock, sae
lang as ye are happy, Willie," said Cuddie.  "We'll hae another
stoup, and pay the score wi' the fore-topsail."

"And are you sae happy awa' frae your bonnie English wife?"

"Yes, I am--happy as a cricket; but do the folk no say that bell
tolled o' its sel on the nicht the king was slain."

"There can be nae sic thing in nature, coxswain," said a seaman.

"But there may be out o' nature," replied the coxswain, sharply; "how
the black de'il can you ken aucht aboot it--you that hae been but a
month at sea?"

"I hae heard o' mony queer things in my time, Cuddie; but I never
heard o' a bell that rang o' its ain accord."

"Weel, I _have_," said the old boatswain, solemnly; "and if ye wad
like to hear a bit yarnie spun anent it--"

"Coil away, boatswain," said one, clinking his stoup.

"Pay it out, carle Archy," said another.

"My faither, honest man, in his young days was master o' the _Saint
Denis_, a pinck of Kinghorn," began the boatswain, "and had three
times the honour o' sailing to France wi' knights and ambassadors,
anent the marriage o' King James wi' the daughter o' Duke Arnold and
Catharine the Duchess o' Cleves.  Weel, on the third time, in the
year '48 as he was bearing awa' for name, and had left far astern the
free port o' auld Dunkerque, wi' its basin, sluice, and batteries, he
found a dismasted and abandoned caravel floating on the sea; and lang
she seemed to have been dismantled and unmanned, for sea-weed and
barnacles grew thick on her gaping planks and rusty chainplates, and
it was next thing to a miracle that she floated at all.  He boarded
and overhauled her, but name, mark, or trace found he none, to
indicate whose she might be, or where she cam' frae.  A fine bell,
wi' a clear siller tone, rocked on her forecastle, and this he
unhooked and brought awa'; and the moment his boat pushed off, the
bell gied a clink wi' its tongue, and the auld battered wreck gaed
down wi' a sough, and half swamped the boat in its swirl as the waves
yawned and closed owre it.  The sailors looked ilka man in the
other's face, and there seemed whisper in their hearts, that there
was something about that auld and nameless wreck that was strange and
eerie.

"My faither hung the bell in his forecastle,--for its tones were
clear and ringing, like a siller horn in a summer wood, or a young
lassie's laugh when her heart is full; but my certie, there were soon
terror and dismay on board the brave pinck _Saint Denis_, of
Kinghorn; for the bell o' the nameless wreck was bewitched, and rang
a' the watches itsel', and untouched by mortal hand; and in the deid
hour o' the mirk nichts its full clear notes vibrated through every
plank and stanchion in the ship, and through every sleeper's ears and
heart; for never before had a bell wi' sic a sweet yet terrible tone
flung its sound upon the waters.  It was thrice thrown overboard, and
thrice it was found hanging on its old neuk in the forecastle; and
when the _Saint Denis_ came home, far and wide spread the terror o'
her story through a' the seaport towns o' Lothian, Fife, and Angus;
so the owners had to break up the pinck, for nae man would bide
aboard o' her, and for years she lay rotting at her anchors in the
harbour o' Wester Kinghorn."

"May this broon ale be bilge if I would ha'e put a foot on her deck
after the bell came back the first time," said the gunner.  "So they
broke the auld craft up for firewood: weel, Archy, after that what
became o' the bell?"

"It was exorcised by candle, book, and holy water, by the Abbot o'
Inchcolm, and thereafter it was hung in the steeple o' Largo, where
unto _this day_ it summons the faithfu' to prayer; but never a note
hath it rung unbidden since its devilish power was destroyed."

"Ugh!" said the gunner, shrugging his thick square shoulders, "St.
Mary keep us frae evil!  And noo for a song, shipmates," he added,
giving his bow a flourish over the fiddle.  "Cuddie will sing us the
last new ballad, made by a gentle makkar, on the admiral--to whom
lang life--and our battle with Sir Stephen Bull,--to whom I also say
long life, southron he be!"

Thus invited, Cuthbert Clewline required no pressing, but after
clearing his throat, giving his ruff a jerk, and hitching at the
points of his wide canvas breeches--which were similar to those still
worn by our fishermen, being so ample and short as to resemble a
kilt, he sang the quaint and old doggrel ballad of

  "Schir Andro Wood,"

to the air of _Sir Andrew Barton_; and as it is somewhat curious as a
nautical ballad of the time, we are tempted to transfer a modernized
copy of it from the "History of the Scots Wars," into these pages,
still preserving, however, the words the coxswain sung.

  "Of all our Scottish mariners, who ever sailed the sea,
  The stoutest was Sir Andrew Wood, the bravest too was he!
  So wroth grew England's haughty king, that a single Scot should keep,
  From Norway's shores to Cape de Verd, the mastery of the deep;
  And he throughout his kingdom did a proclamation make,
  Of a thousand silver pounds per year, Sir Andrew Wood to take.

  "Then up a gallant captain stood, Sir Stephen Bull was he,
  Saying, 'I shall fight this Scottish man till he your prisoner be,'
  Right merrie and right proud withal was England's monarch then,
  And he gave unto this captain bold, three ships with guns and men.
  So sailing to our Scottish seas, he cruised near to Crail,
  Until he saw Sir Andrew Wood with two ships under sail.

  "No enemies old Andrew wot were in the Scottish sea,
  And fearing neither man nor deil, he sailed right merrilie;
  But when he saw the English cross, O joyful was he then,
  And bravely did his crew exhort to fight like Scottish men;
  'For Scotland's king we draw the sword, our bairnies and our wives,
  in the cause we'll fearless risk our precious limbs and lives.'

  "So then he pierced the auld red wine, and a stoup to ilk did gie,
  As owre the capstan-head we swore from southron ne'er to flee!
  Thus on we came with open ports, at six knots going free,
  And vowed to sink--or sink the foe--to die, but never flee!
  And there we fought this battle keen beside the Bass and May,
  From the rising to the set of sun, upon a summer day.

  "The first ball from the English fleet, it shot our foreyard through,
  And the splinters beat our gunner wight, till he was black and blue,
  Then up he sprang, stout Willie Wad, for a fierce wee man he,
  And vowed to drink 'a pint o' bilge,' or he avenged would be;
  Then levelling straight a great carthoun, with rings of iron stayed,
  A bloody lane, from stem to stern, he through the foemen made!

  "The Scots they fought like lyons bold, and many English slewe,
  So the slaughter which they made that day, old England long sall rue;
  And bravely fought Sir Stephen's men, as Englishmen do aye,
  And blows they gave, for ilk they got, as we shall ne'er gainsay;
  Till the red summer eve closed in, and at the set of day,
  We parted, but as tigers part, all panting from the fray.

  "But ere again that summer sun rose from the German main,
  Once more the drummes to quarters beat, the fight began againe;
  And long we fought with deadly hate, as men for life may fight,
  For nought can nerve a Scottish arm, like Scotland's wrong and right.
  Sir Stephen Bull we captive made, and sailing to Dundee,
  We squared the yards, we furled the sails, and anchored merrilie.

  "Then joyful was our noble king, and generous too was he,
  Red gold he gave, and shipped them home, to their ain countrie;
  'Go tell fair England's king,' quoth he, 'that soe I use the brave,
  But if againe ye sayle our seas, you'll win a watery grave.'
  Sir Andrew Wood, our captain bolde, was thanked throughout the land,
  And many a fair reward got he, from good King James's hand.
  Thus bravely was this battle fought, between the Tay and Bass,
  And when _next_ we meet the English fleet, may worse ne'er come to passe!"


Boisterous applause followed the conclusion of this song, and every
man simultaneously lifted his mug of ale to his mouth, in honour of
the sentiment expressed by the last line.

"Thou hast sung well, honest fellow; take this for thy minstrelsy,"
said a gentleman who had loitered near, tossing into the coxswain's
bonnet a golden louis, a donation which immediately drew all eyes
upon him.

He was a handsome man, young apparently, and wore a rich sword and
scarlet mantle, with a jazarine jacket and salade, which concealed
his face, or at least hid so much of it that recognition was
impossible.  He had lingered near Falconer and Barton, and now
resumed his place in a seat adjoining theirs, and if he was not
eavesdropping his conduct looked very much like it; but it was
unmarked by them, for they were too full of their own thoughts.

"Well fare thee, Scotland," sighed Falconer, draining his wine-horn,
"and many such battles may ye win by land and sea.  But, much as I
love thee, thou art no longer a home or a place for me.
France--France or Italy, and their battle-fields, must now be the
place where my life and its sorrows may be ended together."

"Why so, bravo Falconer?" asked a familiar voice, as a hand was laid
on his shoulder.  "What melancholy crooning is this?"

Sir David turned, and his eyes met the face of the young king,--for
he it was who wore the scarlet mantle, and had now laid the salade
aside.

The two gentlemen started to their feet, and uncovered their heads
with reverence.

"Nay, nay, sirs; put on your bonnets," said he.  "I am the younger
man by a few years, and, though a king, have not risked my head so
often in my country's service; but a time may come.  And now answer
me truly, gallant Falconer--why didst thou not tell me of this old
love of thine for our pretty Sybilla Drummond?"

"I dared not."

"Dared not! art thou not a brave fellow?"

"I am a poor one.  Alas! your majesty cannot know the miserable
timidity of the poor."

"Then what fettered thy tongue, stout Barton, eh?--thou who art laird
of manors and acres, ships and stores, enow to make a monarch envy
thee?"

"Because--dare I say it?"

"My true friends may say whatever they please to me."

"Because, your majesty, deep though my love, I dared not aspire to
wed the sister of one who--who is to be our queen."

The young king coloured deeply, and paused for a moment, as if some
such thought had now struck himself for the first time; then he
thrust the idea aside, and said,

"Your fears were foolish, sirs; ye had won those ladies' love, and
surely that was winning the main part of the battle; for, if the song
says rightly, when a woman's heart is won, there is nothing more to
achieve in this world."

"Save fortune and rank; and dare I, the son of a poor skipper of
Borrowstonness, who have neither, compete with long descended peers
who have both?"

"Yes, Falconer," said Barton, proudly; "for thou hast that which we
seldom find among our nobles--a right true Scottish heart, that would
peril all for the weal and honour of the land God gave our fathers."

"By Heaven and by my father's bones, you say well, Robert Barton!"
said the young king, with a sudden emotion of generous enthusiasm;
"and men who have hearts so tried and so true as yours, may well be
the brothers of a Scottish king! and mine you shall be, or this proud
old lord--John Drummond of Stobhall and that ilk--must tell me better
why not!  Come with me then--his house is close by; let us have this
skein unravelled, for to make my loyal subjects happy is the best
tribute I can pay to the memory of that dear departed sire for whom
you fought: he who lost his life in upholding the rights of the
people against the monstrous privileges of a race of titled tyrants."

However reluctant Barton and Falconer might be to thrust themselves
upon the presence of Lord Drummond, while the barbarous treatment
they had so lately experienced there was fresh in their minds, and
being aware that the Laird of Mewie, with a band of wild Celts from
the Highlands of Perthshire, guarded the passages and ambulatories of
the house--the generous energy of the young king, the protection his
presence could afford, his desire, which was law, and the happiness
his intervention might procure, together with the wish for meeting
once again with those they loved so well--were all too powerful to be
resisted; and in silence the two gentlemen followed King James down
the main street of Dundee, through Tyndall's Wynd, where Lord
Lindesay and part of the royal retinue joined them, and together they
all proceeded straight to visit Lord Drummond, the copper horn at
whose gate young Lindesay blew lustily.  And the old baron's half
anger, half astonishment, and entire perplexity at the visit and its
object, we will leave to the reader's imagination, and thus close
this eventful chapter--eventful, at least, to the two lovers who
accompanied the King of Scotland.




CHAPTER LXVII.

THE MAUCHLINE TOWER.

  "Strange tidings these, my cousin!  By St. Jude!
  They'll urge us all to battle ere the time."--_Old Play_.


What followed this happy interview with the leal and true-hearted
James IV. may be gathered from the following conversation, which took
place next day, in the Mauchline Tower, between three Scottish
worthies who have already occupied a prominent place in the annals of
their country, as well as in this more humble narrative.  The
Mauchline Tower, which had the honour of being the residence of Sir
Patrick Gray of Kyneff, when that personage afflicted Dundee with his
presence, stood at the south-west corner of the Murray gate, and
obtained its name from the Campbells of Loudon and Mauchline, to whom
it once belonged.  It was of such strength as to become in after
years a bastelhouse of the town wall, but is now removed, and no
trace of it remains save its name, which is still retained by a court
or alley that opens off the Murray-gate.

In the roughly-arched and stone-paved hall of this ancient mansion,
the windows of which had stone seats and iron gratings, the furniture
was of an old and barbarous aspect, and consisted only of a great
standing-table, forms and cupboards all of black old Scottish oak,
with five or six enormous arm-chairs.  In stone recesses were the
wooden bowls, the tren-plates and luggies used at meals; for the
half-bankrupt baron's silver tankard and pewter dishes were all
carefully put away in lockfast almries.

The wide fireplace was without a grate, and over it was carved the
escutcheon of the Grays--a lion rampant, within a border engrailed;
the emblem of hope upon a wreath, and the motto, "Anchor, fast
anchor," being the cognizance of the first of the race in
Scotland,--Sir Hugh de Gray, Lord of Broxmouth, in the days of
Alexander II.

On the day after the interview between James IV. and the two officers
of the _Yellow Caravel_, Sir James Shaw of Sauchie and Sir Patrick
Gray had a meeting with Hew Borthwick, in the upper hall of this
ancient structure.

Gray and the regicide had been in close consultation, when Sir James
Shaw, a little intoxicated, though the hour was early--hastened in,
with his face inflamed, and expressive of high excitement.

"Here are tidings, with a vengeance!" said he, dashing his blue
velvet bonnet on the paved floor.

"What's astir now?" asked Gray, knitting his dark eyebrows.  "If it
be the reading of the papal dispensation in the cathedral kirk of
Dunblane to-morrow, I know of it already, for our friend Hew
Borthwick has just informed me thereanent."

"The king, with Margaret Drummond, Sir David Falconer--the same
runnion who is captain of Wood's arquebussiers--and Robert Barton,
with the Lord Drummond, and the ladies Euphemia and Sybilla--all
smiles and merriment, and riding side by side, with hawks upon their
dexter wrists, each lover by his lemane, and guarded by the lances of
the Royal Guard--have left Dundee within this hour."

"Which way--east or west?" asked Gray, starting to his feet.

"By the western gate, and past Blackness."

"For Dunblane?"

"Yes; and the constable of Dundee carried the royal pennon on a
Lance."

"Damnation!"

"So say I--doubly," stammered Shaw.

"On what errand have they gone?"

"Men say variously," replied the Laird of Sauchie, opening and
shutting his bloodshot eyes; "but I overheard that venerable foutre
whom the courtiers call Duke of Montrose, tell his son--that fop the
Lord Lindesay--that the king was gone to hear the sentence of
excommunication fulminated against those who slew his father."

"That concerns thee, Master Hew."

"_Sir_ Hew," sneered Shaw.

Borthwick winced, and smiled bitterly.

"He said, moreover, that James was to receive from the bishop's hand,
an iron belt, to be worn for ever under his shirt, in memory of the
day he drew his sword against his father."

"Few who were at Sauchie, on either side of the burn, will be likely
to forget the day, Sir James.  Well--and is there anything more?"
asked Gray, biting his glove and rasping his steel spurs on the
pavement.

"Yes--chief of all--that Margaret Drummond will there be crowned as
Queen of Scotland, at the same time as her husband, and that the Lord
Lyon, with all his heralds and pursuivants, the chancellor and all
the great officers of state, are appointed to keep tryst at Dunblane."

"What--the reading of the papal letter, the crowning of a king and
queen, and a sentence of excommunication, all to be performed in one
day--not omitting this freak of the iron belt--pshaw! thou ravest
man; and I will not believe it."

"And why not?"

"Because, since Scone became old fashioned, every coronation must
take place at Holyrood.  A rare bundle of news thou'st brought us,
gossip."

"I have not yet told thee all--for the best of the pudding is still
in the pot."

"Well, say on," said Gray, shrugging his shoulders with something
between a smile and a frown on his face.

"I heard Sir Andrew Wood say to the Constable of Dundee, that
Falconer and Barton were to be wedded by the bishop to old John
Drummond's daughters--and by the king's express command; but thou
wilt not believe _that_ either, perhaps?"

"Wedded--is he as mad as his father was before him?  Will he wed one
sister himself, and in the person of others raise those traders'
sons--loons whose ancestors are buried in obscurity, and whose
fathers brought salted hides and tallow, tar and hemp from Memmel,
cartwheels and saddles, iron pots and pewter pans, from Flanders--to
a close alliance with the Scottish crown?  God's death, it's
monstrous--pshaw! and cannot be!  Our peers and barons are not so low
in pride or poor in spirit as to brook such an outrage----"

"Unless King Henry paid them for it--which he is not likely to do."

"But what will the Lords Home and Hailes--Bothwell, I mean--say to
this?"

"The constable put the same question to yonder gorbellied admiral,
who replied that the king had undertaken to pacify them; but it was
no business of his--a mariner's--to study such ware; then he added
something about a gunner and his lintstock, a steersman and his helm,
which I did not understand, but conceived to mean something insolent
to the nobility."

"And doubtless it was so--the tarry varlet!" said Gray, stamping his
armed heel on the paved floor; "Sir James, thou amazest by all this!
but where tarries now the Lord Angus?"

"He is hunting the red-deer on the wild Rinns of Galloway," replied
Shaw, with a reckless laugh.

"I might have shrewdly guessed he was not on this side of the Howe of
Fife."

"Are there any fresh tidings from Henry of England?"

"Henry expects them from us," said Gray with one of his hissing
whispers and deep satanic smiles.

"True--I am forgetting our fair stipulation, penned by Master Quentin
Kraft, and of which there are duplicates in London, to the effect
that he--that is, King Henry--shall use all interest with our king to
have my barony of Sauchie erected into an earldom--"

"And _my_ barony of Kyneff and estate of Caterline erected into a
lordship; I do not see why I should not have put in for an earldom
too--but I shall content me if made as good as my chief, Kinfauns;
though I would make as noble a Scottish peer as most of them."

For once in his life, Sir Patrick Gray spoke truth.

"But instead of gaining these things, sirs," said Borthwick, who had
listened in attentive silence to all the foregoing, "ye have lost
your governorships of Stirling and of Broughty, with all their
attendant customs, kains, and powers, and now--"

"The marriage on which these airy coronets depend will never happen,
I fear me," said Shaw, seating himself with a groan.

"It shall happen," said Gray, furiously, as he took a huge tankard of
wine and three flagons from a side press; "we have made but one or
two false moves, Sir James; next time we'll have better luck; and the
tables will turn when we have Margaret Tudor for queen.  She is said
to be not over-handsome; but 'twill be all the same to King James
when the candles are out in Linlithgow Bower.  So Margaret Drummond
must be removed," he added, filling up the silver-rimmed horns with
Rochelle.

"We have each said so a thousand times, sirs," said Borthwick, "and
yet she still remains."

"This removal must then be thy task, Master Hew," said Shaw, setting
down the pot, in the purple contents of which he had dipped his wiry
mustachios; "get thee a nag at the Stone Bicker, or anywhere else;
hie thee away after these galliards to Dunblane, and learn what can
be done; for nothing but desperate measures can save us now, as we
are desperate men; one may see that by these bare walls and these
half mutchkin stoups of sour Rochelle."

"Thou hast still the powder of Kraft, the London apothecary?" asked
Gray, in a whisper.

"Yea," answered Borthwick; "and it is said to be so potent, that I
have borne it about me in great fear, though it is carefully sealed
and waxed all over."

"Draw closer," hissed the voice of Gray, as he sunk it into an almost
inaudible whisper.

The reader is already aware that Borthwick had been originally a
priest of Dunblane, and, consequently, he knew well the whole
cathedral and its locality.  It was therefore agreed that he should
disguise himself in any manner he deemed most fitted for the
occasion; that he should depart for that secluded little city, and
endeavour to put to some deadly use the poison with which he was
entrusted.

It was, moreover, arranged that at midnight, on the second day from
this one, they should both meet him at the Bridge of Dunblane, and
hear what his success had been.  Gray supplied this trusty ruffian
with a horse, and Shaw gave him gold, for he had about seventy miles
of a rough and devious road to travel, and so they separated; the two
barons to prepare and mount, for any emergency, all the armed
retainers they could collect; and the regicide to execute his
terrible mission.

"This object once achieved," said Gray, "_we must rid ourselves of
Borthwick_--for he knoweth over many secrets to make our heads secure
on our shoulders!"




CHAPTER LXVIII.

DUNBLANE.

      "For human bliss and woe in the frail thread
      Of human life are all so closely twined,
      That till the shears of Fate the texture shred,
      The close succession cannot be disjoined,
  Nor dare we from one hour judge that which comes behind."
                                              _Harold the Dauntless_.


The information of Sauchie was all correct, save in that part which
referred to the coronation of Margaret, which James intended should
take place at the same time as his own, not in the little episcopal
city of Dunblane, but in the capital city of Edinburgh, amid all the
splendour with which he could invest it; and already the Lord High
Treasurer, Sir William Knollis, better known as Lord St. John of
Jerusalem, being Preceptor of the Scottish Knights of Rhodes, the
Lord Chancellor, the Secretary of State, and the Lords of the Privy
Council, were making the necessary arrangements for the great
ceremonial at Holyrood.

The king's influence, united to Barton's acknowledged worth and
landed possessions, operated so far on Lord Drummond, as to make him
sullenly acquiesce in the marriage of Euphemia to one whose betrothal
could not, in a Catholic age, be broken without incurring the penalty
of sin; and, in the same spirit, he permitted arrangements to be made
for Sir David Falconer, whom James called "the gentlest and the
bravest knight at court," wedding Sybilla; meanwhile the old lord
consoled himself for thus stooping to the royal will by reflecting
that he still had two other daughters growing up--Beatrice and
Elizabeth--who should be forced bongré malgré to marry the first
eligible earls upon whom he could lay the hands of a father-in-law.

The king's train was received with all honour by the Baron Bailie of
Dunblane, and Sir Edmund Hay of Melginch, the chamberlain of the
diocese, who marshalled them to the palace of the good old bishop,
James Chisholm, whose name must not be confounded with that of his
successor, William Chisholm, a base and irreverend prelate, who
robbed the see of its revenues to maintain his children, and
desecrated the episcopal palace by scenes of licentiousness.

This palace stood to the southward of the magnificent cathedral, on
the edge of the declivity which slopes down towards the river Allan.
It was surrounded by thick old copsewood and by striking and
picturesque scenery; but it has long since fallen into shapeless
ruin, and now only a few vestiges of its lower apartments can be
traced.

The four lovers were so happy that we shall not presume to intrude
upon them, or attempt to transfer to paper any description of their
joy, but will leave them to their quiet and dreamy rambles, arm in
arm, or hand in hand, in that deep and finely wooded glen below
Dunblane, where the precipices overhang the Allan, and the windings
of the dell give so many lovely glimpses of foliaged scenery; and to
their sport of shooting at the butts with feathered arrows, in the
smooth park without the old cathedral walls, where many hundred years
of careful pasturage and mowing had made the green grass as smooth as
velvet; for now it was never brushed by other feet than those of the
gliding deer or the lighter-footed hares and rabbits; and there the
young king, and even the kind bishop, with some of the prebends, drew
the bow to please the three beautiful Drummonds; and Margaret, with
her blonde hair and sweet blue eyes, was voted the best shot of them
all--for James and his two favourite subjects were too gallant to
beat her shooting, and the most reverend father, by Divine permission
Bishop of Dunblane, was somewhat too stout and pursy to draw a shaft
like her.

They were all happy, and pure joy beamed in their eyes; it glowed in
their young hearts and mantled in their cheeks.

Two alone were grave; viz., old Lord Drummond, because he was
somewhat perplexed, or felt that he cut rather a foolish figure, and
was about to have for sons-in-law two men on whom James dared not yet
bestow nobility for fear of raising the anger of older patentees; and
on the young king's brow a cloud was resting, for on the morrow he
was to receive from the Bishop's hand "the sackcloth shirt and iron
belt," which he was to wear as the self-imposed penance of filial
disobedience;

  "While for his royal father's soul,
  The chanters sung, the bells did toll;"

and kindly and consolingly the white-haired bishop sought to soothe
the sorrow and disperse the gloom which the young monarch strove in
vain to overcome.

Could it be that a mysterious presentiment of approaching evil was
hovering in his heart?  In Scotland, we often hear of such
forebodings still.

On the day following the intended sentence of excommunication,
Margaret was to behold one sister wedded to Robert Barton and another
to David Falconer; and on that day the _Yellow Frigate_ and her
consorts would startle the broad blue Firth that rolls before Dundee
by a loud and merry salvo from their brass culverins and iron
arquebusses à croc.

Already had each beautiful bride playfully tried the espousal
ring--the emblem of eternity--upon her pretty finger--that third
finger of the left hand from which, according to an old superstition,
there ran one mysterious fibre directly to the heart; and now we may
inform our fair readers, whom such items may interest, that the said
rings were not the plain hoops used in our own day, but each was
massive and chased, inscribed by a holy legend, and having on it two
ruby hearts, surmounted by a little crown of diamonds, for such was
the fashion in the olden time.

And now, as the day on which the sisters were to receive communion at
mass in the cathedral, dawned in sunny glory and splendour, lighting
up the painted lattices, the grey walls, and green woods of the old
episcopal palace, and tinting with its brightest hues the rapid
waters of the Allan, the old bishop patted their silken tresses, and
called them his "good children," as they knelt to receive his morning
blessing in the dining-hall, reminding them with a smile, that "happy
was the bride whom the sun shone on, and that he hoped the god of day
would not rise less brightly on the morrow."

And they all smiled to each other timidly and fondly, for, alas! they
little knew that for some of them to-morrow was--eternity.

Margaret, the Queen of Scotland--for such indeed was she now--was to
receive the communion with her sisters; but Barton and Falconer
having, we may suppose, obtained it but recently, or for some other
reason now unknown, _did not_ share it with them, which will account
for their escaping the perilous web which English guile and Scottish
treason were weaving around them all.




CHAPTER LXIX.

THE MIDNIGHT TRYST.

                            "And, as they say,
  Lamentings heard i' the air; strange scream of death;
  And prophesying, with accents terrible,
  Of dire combustion and confused events,
  New hatched to the woful time."--_Macbeth_.


True to his appointment, about twelve o'clock, "that hour o'nicht's
black arch the keystane," on the night before the important day of
the three solemnities, when the papal dispensation was to be read, an
excommunication to be pronounced, and that Iron Belt, so famous in
the history of James IV., to be consecrated and bestowed--Hew
Borthwick, the fell spirit, the evil genius of Margaret Drummond--or
rather, the vile slave and tool of villains more subtle than
himself--appeared at the ancient bridge of Dunblane; the same which
is mentioned in the introduction to this work as being the erection
of the Bishop Findlay Dermach, in the year 1406.

The stillness of midnight reigned in and around that diminutive
cathedral city.  As Hew Borthwick, the outcast of nature, loitered on
the old and narrow bridge which spans the Allan, and lingered under
the gloom of some enormous alder or boor-trees that grew out of the
rocks and threw their shadow on the path, some strange ideas began to
hover in his mind.

Save the rush of the river over its rocky bed, the rustle of the
autumn leaves in the coppice, or the bay of a sheep-dog on the
distant muirlands, there was no sound in the air; but there came many
an imaginary one to the ears of Borthwick.  At one time he thought a
wild cry went past him on the wind; at another, he was certain that
voices were lamenting among the copsewood by the river side.

He listened breathlessly!

All was still, save the beating of his own heart.

Was conscience beginning to be stirred at last within that arid,
cruel, and stony breast, or were these ideas the mere result of the
dark and midnight hour, the place, the time, and the solemn and awful
superstitions incident to the age and the nation?

Swinging high aloft in the beautiful square tower of carved
stonework, the cathedral bell tolled the hour of twelve.  The first
sonorous note, as it rolled away upon the trembling air, made
Borthwick's coward heart leap within him; and he listened to each
stroke in breathless agony, as a wretch might listen to his
death-knell, and when the last and twelfth had boomed away upon the
darkened sky, he breathed more freely, but the perspiration hung in
drops upon his clammy brow, for that bell had roused old memories in
his heart, and called back the days that were gone, as an old
familiar voice or gong might do.

"Tush!" he muttered; "let me not be now white-hearted and a fool,
when the last die has been cast in this infernal game--the last scene
prepared in this tremendous drama.  Twelve has struck, but there is
no appearance of them yet!"

Faint and flickering lights shot over the tall and many-coloured
windows of the cathedral, and played between the slender tracery of
their shafted mullions, or died away in the recesses of the church.
Those were the tapers of monks who had received a penance of midnight
prayers to say at certain tombs or shrines; and our lurker remembered
the time when he too--but he turned on his heel, and strove to forget
those better days and that embittering memory.  "Would the tryst had
been anywhere but here."

Rays of light were streaming more brightly from the smaller but
strongly grated windows of the bishop's palace, and they played on
the brown foliage of the woods below, and on the rushing surface of
the river in the dell.  One by one these rays of light faded away; at
last darkness reigned in the mansion, and Borthwick shuddered, for he
knew that Margaret Drummond and her sisters would then be a-bed.

He was deadly pale; and had any one passed him casually on that high
and narrow bridge, his aspect, even at night, must assuredly have
startled them.

To him it was strange and almost irritating, that all the life he had
passed, with many of its minuter and long-forgotten incidents, should
now rise before him like a long unfolding scroll, strongly, darkly,
and fearfully, as it might do before one who is about to die; and a
terrible tissue it was!

He recalled the awful name and fate of his parents, and the promises
he had made to the humane old priest who had saved him doubly, as he
was wont to say, "like a brand from the burning," and the vows he had
made in youth, in that cathedral aisle, to spend a life of holiness,
of usefulness, of purity, and of prayer, to atone for the real or
traditional atrocities of Ewain Gavelrigg and his wife among the
Sidlaw hills; and how had he kept these vows?

"Accursed be these thoughts!" said he, as he walked to and fro, and
bit his nether lip, as if to control the growing fear and bitterness
of his heart.  At that moment something struck his face, and he
sprang aside in terror uncontrollable.

"Pshaw!" said he, "a bat!"

Everything was fraught with some old memory to him now, and he
remembered the old story of its origin to which he had often
listened, as the monks sat round the refectory fire in the cold
winter nights, when the Allan was sheeted with ice, and the blast of
the snow-clad Grampians moaned in the leafless woods of Dunblane; and
the voice of his old patron came back to his ears in the accents of
awe with which he used to tell the story:--of how, when a boy of
seven years of age, the Saviour of mankind was at play in the streets
of Jerusalem, with other little Jews, and in sport they fashioned
various birds and animals of clay, and then the children quarrelled
among themselves, each preferring his own workmanship, and all united
in laughing to scorn an uncouth bird made by the little hands of the
golden-haired boy, the son of Mary, till the tears fell from his
eyes; and as they dropped upon the little image, lo! it expanded its
wings of clay and flew from hand to hand, and after fluttering over
his head, soared into the air and became a veritable _bat_.  On
beholding this, the children fled, and on relating the story to their
parents, were by them forbidden to play again with that bright-haired
little boy, whom they stigmatized as an embryo sorcerer; and
Borthwick remembered with mingled pity and envy the good faith, the
awe, and holy interest with which the old and silver-bearded priests
bent their heads around the winter hearth, and listened to legends
such as this; for it was indeed an age "when old simplicity was in
its prime."

At last his reveries were interrupted by perceiving at the other end
of the bridge two men on foot; they had been there for some time
conversing and regarding him, but unobserved by Borthwick, whose eyes
and mind were turned inward, if we may say so; and now by their
height, bearing, and stealthy motions, he was convinced that they
were no other than Sir James Shaw of Sauchie and Sir Patrick Gray of
Kyneff.

"Well met, fair sir," said the latter, with his usual courtly sneer.

"Good-morrow, Master Borthwick," added Shaw, whose incessant
intoxication was quite visible, even in the dark.

Both were well armed in cuirasses, gorgets, and plate sleeves, with
swords and daggers in their belts, and they bore on their heads
French salades which completely concealed their faces, forming at the
same time a defence which no sword could cleave or pole-axe break.

"You have good tidings, I opine, sir," said Gray.

"Alas! what leads you to infer so?"

"Your keeping tryst so faithfully," said he, again.

"Is this troublesome dame disposed of?" asked his companion, with a
hiccup.

"To-morrow will tell--"

"To-morrow, and why to-morrow?" demanded Shaw, angrily.

"God's death, fellow! have we ridden a matter of seventy miles, from
the Mauchline Tower to the Brig of Dunblane, only to hear this?"

"Hear me, sirs, and be patient," said Borthwick, who, to their
astonishment, seemed to be as crushed in spirit as he was pale in
face and trembling in speech; "I have essayed a hundred modes of
obtaining access to the Bishop's palace, that I might reach Dame
Margaret's room, which is in the north-east corner thereof, for I
know every nook and cranny of that house of old, as if it were my
own."

"And with what intent?"

"To poison the holy water font, which I understand hangs at the head
of her bed."

"A rare idea," hiccupped Shaw, "provided King Henry's powder be
strong enough."

"'Sdeath, the young king likely dips his dainty fingers too therein,
so that would only mar King Henry's matrimony for ever--well."

"The king's pages and attendants, archers, esquires, and priests,
thronged every avenue, so all attempts to reach the room were vain.
By the way of the bishop's kitchen, I had less hope; for though I
might dose a dish strongly enough to poison a score, yet how could I
be assured that Dame Margaret would eat of it?"

"True; then by the Holy Father, we have come but to hear of
difficulties."

"And to learn that nothing has been done," grumbled Sir James Shaw;
"a pestilent humbug!"

"Patience, sirs, patience," groaned Borthwick; "failing about the
palace, I resolved to try what could be achieved by the way of the
cathedral."

"Hah!" said Gray, starting.

"I know its avenues well--"

"Ay, you were a monk, and snuffled Latin there for many a year--well."

"I begin to breathe again--so--" muttered Shaw.

"I had heard with certainty that the three sisters were to receive
the Blessed Sacrament there to-morrow from the hands of the bishop,
with all solemnity--"

"Well, well, what then?" asked Gray, impatiently.

"Yes, what then?" repeated the Laird of Sauchie, whose eyes were
always closing.

"I stole the vestments of the sacrist who hath charge of the altar
vessels, flowers, and ornaments, and whose duty it is to provide
candles, bread, and wine for the communion.  Well I knew where old
Father Duncan's cassock hung when the good man was a-bed; and I knew
the pocket too wherein he kept the key of the iron-doored niche
containing the cruets of wine, beside the great altar.  I donned the
gown, I found the key--with eyes half blind, with ears that tingled,
and a heart that trembled at every fancied sound, I glided through
the long aisle of yonder silent church, and sought the niche,
unchanged as when I saw it last, some sixteen years ago!  I opened
it--softly--slowly--fearfully, and the cruets of wine were before
me--to-night, sirs--only to-night--yea only an hour ago were they
before me, in my hands--and--and--"

"My God! thou didst not poison the wine--the wine about to become--"

"Hush, oh hush, in pity now; I poisoned one of them at least."

"Horror!" exclaimed Gray of Kyneff; "I foresaw not this.  I would
have cared little about the poisoning of some vulgar wine-pot,
suppose that all Dunblane had died o' the dose; but the
Communion--the Holy Eucharist--"

"_I poisoned it!_" groaned Borthwick, while his teeth chattered; "and
to-morrow will solve a grand and awful mystery."

"And gain me an earldom," said Shaw.

Gray placed a hand upon his mouth.

There was a pause during which the three wretches gazed upon each
other in silence; for it would require a Catholic, and more
especially a Scottish Catholic of that age, to feel the full effect
of the chilling awe and dread the act of this apostate priest
produced upon himself and his two companions.  Even _their_ hearts
quailed and trembled at it; for though the infamous and unjust
conduct of the popes to Scotland, in early times and during the
Crusades, made the people value lightly the bulls of the Vatican--so
lightly, indeed, that more than one papal legate, natheless his
purple cope and scarlet stockings, has been assaulted, stripped, and
driven across the English frontier, with the nation in arms, and the
country flaming at his heels; still the influence of religious
sentiment, whatever its phase, was, as it has ever been, strong in
the hearts of the Scots; but now with Shaw and Gray it was mingled
with an overpowering superstition, and veneration for ancient,
incomprehensible, and mysterious rites.

"A holy horror curdled all their blood;" and thus for some minutes
none of them spoke.

"This sacrilege is awful!" said Sir Patrick.

"But the Holy Eucharist will _not_ poison," said Shaw, whom the
communication had completely sobered; "so thou hast, perhaps, but
fooled thyself as well as us, Master Borthwick."

"What is this, Laird of Sauchie," asked Borthwick with gloomy fury;
"art thou so dull as to think so? was there not William Comyn, the
Lord High Chancellor of Scotland, in the days of King Malcolm IV.--a
consecrated bishop too--who was poisoned by the wine of the
Eucharist, and fell stone dead, in rochet, cope, and stole, on the
steps of the altar?"

Another long pause ensued, during which Gray whispered to Shaw,--

"We must now close this fellow's mouth for ever; a dagger stroke, and
over the bridge with him.  Be ready when I say, 'Let us part, Sir
Hew."

"May the blessing, or invocation, render this poison, if not
altogether null in effect, at least less fatal than death?"

On this important point, Borthwick dared not reply, and they could
hear his teeth chattering.

"Where is there a leech?" asked the ex-governor of Stirling.

"There is none nearer than Perth,--at least none that I wot of."

"How, Ninian the barber-chirurgeon in the Speygate?"

"The same; and he is too far off to be available," said Borthwick.

"He is the only one on the south side of Tay, except the Highland
seers and crones," said Shaw, loosening his dagger in its sheath of
velvet.

"Ah," continued Gray, conversing in the assumed tone of ease, to
throw their intended victim off his guard; "did he not nearly slay
the Lord Angus by piercing him too deep with his phlebotemus?"

"Missing the vein and cutting the artery,--a very fool."

"For which, if he had failed to stop it, the Master of Angus would
have hung him over his own stair-head.  He knoweth the signs and
stars," continued this cold-blooded ruffian, looking casually, as it
were, over the bridge to measure the height by his cold and stern
eye; "but who save asses employ him, Master Borthwick?"

"Oh, many," continued Shaw, laughing, as they drew nearer their
victim; "husbands, to have doses for scolding wives, and expectant
heirs whose purses are empty, for old and doting uncles; in short,
anyone who wishes to be rid of anyone else; for he enjoys pretty much
the reputation of your friend the apothecary at--how name you the
place--oh yes, Bucklersbury, in London, ha! ha! is it not so, Master
Borthwick?"

He made no reply, for their ghastly merriment chilled him.

"Such a leech will not do for the daughters of the Lord Drummond,"
resumed Shaw; "but the night wears apace."

"_Let us part then, Sir Hew!_" said Gray, and at the same moment both
their daggers clashed together in the breast of Borthwick, whose hot
blood spirted horribly through his pyne doublet, over the hilts, and
over their fingers.

The first blows failed to kill him, and he sank heavily against the
parapet of the bridge.

"Mercy," he sighed; "mercy--God--mercy!"

"Such mercy as thou gavest King James," replied the villains as an
apology to themselves, while they buried their poniards again and
again in his heart, with a heavy and awful sound.

"'Tis but an act of self-defence, this!" said Gray.

"True--true--of course it is--he might have destroyed us, else,"
added Shaw, in a breathless voice.

"He is gone now--so over with him!" replied the other.

Lifting the heavy, and yet warm body of the regicide, they shot it
over the steep bridge into the rapid stream below, where it fell with
a loud splash.  As it was swept down the current, they sprang upon
their horses, which were haltered under the boortrees.

"Now, Sir James, away for Kyneff or Caterline!" cried Gray, as they
dashed through the dark streets of Dunblane, and at full speed took
the road towards that great and fertile plain which lies between the
northern bank of the Tay and the base of the Sidlaw hills, and is
known so well in song as the Carse of Gowrie.




CHAPTER LXX.

THE IRON BELT.

  "I love! and love hath given me sweet thoughts, to God akin;
  And oped a living paradise, my heart of hearts within;
  Oh! from this Eden of my life, God keep the serpent, Sin."
                                                    GERALD MASSEY.


Pontifical high mass was performed with unusual splendour in the
cathedral church of Dunblane.  On this occasion, the bishop preceded
by his cross-bearer, and the banner of the diocese, borne by Sir
Edward Hay of Melginch, by all the prebends of the cathedral, with
choristers and singing-boys, passed in procession through the centre
aisle to the altar, having on his head a mitre blazing with jewels,
gorgeous robes on his shoulders, and wearing scarlet gloves on his
hands, which bore the identical crook by one touch of which Saint
Blane restored sight to the blind, and life to the dead heir of
Appilby, as we may still see recorded in the fifty-seventh folio of
the Breviary of Aberdeen.

The king was on a royal seat, surrounded by the lords and ladies of
the court and household, and many of the great officers of state; the
Captain of his Guards, Lord Drummond, Falconer, Barton, and many
more, all richly dressed in the gaudy costumes of the time, when
fancy and fashion ran riot among silk and satin, velvet and miniver,
feathers, jewels, and lace.  Bright steel cuirasses, cloth of gold,
satin doublets and velvet mantles, with the silver stars and green
ribands of the Thistle, or the escallops of St. Michael, and the
crosses of many a foreign Order of knighthood, made the group around
the young monarch alike gay and splendid.

The entire population of the little city and of the adjacent district
crowded the triple aisles of the magnificent church; and on groups of
these, all of them attired in varying colours, and various
fashions--for Dunblane approaches the Highland border--long hazy
flakes of light fell inward from the three tall lance-headed
compartments of the great western window, in which were a thousand
prismatic tints, as martyred saints, crowned kings, and pallid
Virgins stood amid pious scrolls and gaudy flowers, green foliage and
bright armorial bearings, all woven in the brilliant glass, filling
up the double mullions and grotesquely twisted tracery.

This beautiful church is less richly decorated than many others in
Scotland; its mouldings and clustered capitals are without flowering;
yet from the loftiness of its windows, and the general symmetry of
its proportions, this effort of the architectural taste and piety of
King David I. is full of grandeur and dignity.  From its walls hung
the banners and scutcheons of the once powerful Earls of Strathearn,
with the sword of Malise, who fought at the Battle of the Standard;
and the helmet of Sir Maurice of Strathearn, who was slain at the
Battle of Durham; there, too, hung the trophies of the Lords of
Strathallan, and the Drummonds of Drummond.  Beneath the pavement,
which was lettered with epitaphs, and rich with graven brasses, their
bones were reposing, cered in lead, deep in the gothic vaults below;
and there their effigies may yet be seen, with shield on arm, with
sword at side, and hands upraised as in prayer.

The light stole through the windows with a chastened effect, and so
many tapers burned upon the great altar, that with all its gilding it
seemed a pyramid of flame; and in front of it were the floating
garments of the bishop and his attendant priests, with the thin white
smoke of the censers rising among them; while the full-toned organ,
with its trumpet sound, and the harmony of a hundred voices, all
melodiously attuned, rolled along the high-arched roofs, and went at
once to the depth of every soul and the inmost chords of every
heart--calling, as it were, to prayer and to enthusiasm, the whole
being of every listener.

On the altar lay two bridal wreaths, and a peculiar belt of iron.

The wreaths were those to be worn on the morrow by Euphemia and
Sybilla Drummond; the iron belt was to be the life-long penance of
King James.

In the lower aisles, "a dim religious light" brooded over all; and in
the solemnity of devotion, every knee and every head were bowed, and,
outwardly at least, all was hushed and humble meekness.

Before the carved oak rail of the sanctuary knelt the three sisters,
with their bright hair confined in golden cauls, and their faces
bowed before the venerable bishop--an old man, whose days went back
to those of the Regent Murdoc Stuart, and the wars of James I. with
Alaster of the Isles.

Mass was performed with great solemnity; and though few
Catholics--perhaps none--will believe what ensued, or that blessed
wine would poison, yet we have it on record, that a Scotsman, who was
Bishop of Durham in 1153, was destroyed by the wine of the Eucharist,
in which a deadly drug had been placed by his enemies, some English
priests.

From the prelate's hand the three fated sisters received the
communion, of which he had himself partaken, impregnated, as it was,
with a poison as deadly as ever human science or human villany
prepared.

"_Corpus Domini nostri_," &c. &c., prayed the poor bishop, with
reverence, and eyes half-closed as he signed the cross in blessing
over their fair foreheads, and placed between the lips of each the
wafer which he had dipped in the poisoned wine, and of which he had
himself partaken!

The poor girls, with their white hands crossed upon their fluttering
breasts, and their young hearts, full of pious joy, returned to the
crimson canopied stall, over which their father's feudal banner, with
the three bars, wavy, hung beside the royal standard, with the lion,
gules, and there again they knelt in prayer beside the youthful king.

When mass was over, the bishop ascended the altar, still robed in
fall pontificals, with his mitre on his head, and resigning his crook
to an assistant priest who waited on the steps, he opened the famous
letter of Dispensation.

"The Most Holy Father in Christ our Lord, Innocent the Eighth, by
Divine Providence, _servus servorum Dei_, to his dearly beloved
brother James, also by Divine mercy, Bishop of Dunblane, and to all
others, &c. &c., wisheth health and benediction in the Lord."

Beginning thus, he read, in pure and sonorous Latin, the Papal
authority, removing the guilt and sin committed, and absolving,
dissolving, and annulling the ties of blood between James, by the
grace of God, King of the Scots, and his cousin, the Lady Margaret
Drummond; and thus, by the apostolical power confided to the Holy
See, removing every hindrance and impediment to their lawful
marriage, "dated at Rome, on the festival of Corpus Christi, and of
our Pontificate then fourth year."

The bishop closed the letter which he had brought from such a
distance, and which had involved him in so many personal perils, and
then resumed his glittering crozier from its bearer.

Then Margaret, whose small white hand the young king had pressed
repeatedly, and whose agitated heart had beat wildly, felt as if a
mountain had been lifted off it; for fondly, fully, and devoutly she
believed in the annulment it announced, and the authority from which
it came; and her soft blue eyes beamed under her velvet hood and
gold-fringed caul with the most beautiful joy, and with the purest
and holiest of rapture as they met those of the young king, her
husband--ay, her husband now, without secrecy, or fear, or sin.

"Margaret--my own beloved Margaret!" he whispered, and tremblingly
kissed her brow, an act of respect and tenderness which stirred the
hearts of all the people.

Honest Barton was spelling away industriously at his missal, content,
as he thought, and said inwardly, "that Euphemia was alongside of
him, and that, on the morrow, with a fair wind and a friar's
blessing, they would cast anchor together in smooth riding, and in
the sunny haven of matrimony;" but Falconer and Sybilla knelt hand in
hand behind the high oak-screen, and deeply thanked God and the good
young king, who had brought to this happy and most unexpected issue
the long hushed secret of their ardent hearts.

Would that we could leave them thus; but the ways of fate, and the
course of unforeseen events, are inexorable.

James IV. now received from the Bishop's hand the
penance-girdle--that _Iron Belt_--to which he added every year a
weight to worn in memory of his father's fall, and which he never
laid aside either by day or by night, until the morning of the fatal
ninth of September, 1513, thirty-five years after; and on that day he
perished at Flodden, with ten thousand Scottish hearts as brave as
his own!

Now old Duncan, the sacristan, supplied innumerable torches and
tapers to the people, giving one to every man, woman, and child.  The
whole church become filled with light--a blaze, a flood of flame,
till the eyes ached, and the beautiful lines of St. Paulinus seemed
to be realized in the old aisles of Dunblane:

  "With crowded lamps are these bright altars crowned,
  And waxen tapers shed perfume around,
  From fragrant wicks beams calm the scented ray,
  To gladden night, and brighten radiant day.
  Meridian splendours thus light up the night,
  And day itself, illum'd with sacred light,
  Wears a new glory, borrowed from those rays,
  That stream from countless lamps in never-ending blaze."

But this unusual glory chilled the hearts of the vast congregation
who filled that great cathedral church; for now the bishop prepared
to pass upon the murderers of the late king and their abettors, the
heaviest fulminations of the Vatican: and in that age, when churchmen
united spiritual with temporal power, everything in nature, from the
king on his throne to a caterpillar on the leaf of a tree, were
liable to anathema.  To men, its sentence was armed with a thousand
terrors.  The ex-communicated person was shut out, cut off, as it
were, from all social life; his servants, his wife--even his dearest
children, dare not come near him, or relieve his most urgent wants by
a crumb of bread or a drop of water; for he had forfeited all claims
on humanity, all natural rights and legal privileges.

Any man might slay him, and under this inhuman law, even his body was
denied proper burial; in some sequestered or hated, at least,
unconsecrated spot, it was flung aside, and covered up with stones;
and now the bells of Dunblane began to toll a solemn peal, and the
inmost hearts of all the people, surrounded as they were by that
blaze of light, became appalled, as the bishop, in a loud but
melancholy voice, poured forth against the regicides the sentence of
Pope Innocent VIII.: "In nomine Patris et Filii et Spiritus Sancti,
et benedictæ nostræ Dominæ Sanctissimæ Mariæ, atque virtute angelorum
archangelorumque, &c., à sancte matris Ecclesias græmio segregamus ac
perpetuæ _maledictionis anathemate condemnamus_!"

The three sisters felt a sleep stealing over their humid eyes and
hushing their beating hearts, as they nestled close together, as if
in terror of the spiritual thunder that rang over their heads in a
language they could not comprehend; but, perhaps, it was excess of
happiness at their own position--or, perhaps, the blaze of light
oppressed them, for they were silent, motionless, and still.

Timidly they cast a furtive glance at their father, Lord Drummond, as
he stood near them, sheathed in the same armour he had worn at the
Battle of Sauchieburn, with a wax taper clutched like a lance in his
gauntleted hand; unsubdued by the terrible anathema, the proud noble
heard it with constitutional indifference, or concealed his inward
fear under an outward smile of scorn.

But his daughters felt sick and faint.

Margaret closed her eyes and drooped her head upon the shoulder of
Euphemia, whose hand was now clasped by Sybilla.

As the bishop concluded, he extinguished his taper, and every one in
the church followed his example,--the prebendaries and others
treading their torches vigorously underfoot, and Lord Drummond
crushed his under his armed heel with as much animus as Sir Andrew
Wood might have done; while the bells continued to toll the knell of
the doomed souls, at long and solemn intervals, in the towers of the
cathedral, the interior of which seemed to become suddenly dark and
gloomy, for the day without had overcast, and dense autumn clouds,
charged with mist and rain, came rolling from the Grampians across
the lowering sky.

A chill--a horror of the scene, this solemn curbing with bell book
and candle--had fallen upon the people, who were stealing softly and
hastily away; while the poor old bishop, exhausted by the long
service and its exciting nature, and more than all by the poison he
had imbibed, tottered into the arms of Sir Walter Drummond, the dean,
and was borne out by a side door, with all the air of a dying man.

The three sisters, as if absorbed in prayer, were still leaning
forward against the oak rail, and kneeling on the velvet cushions;
they remained thus very long after all the congregation had
dispersed; and loth to disturb them, their happy lovers lingered in
the aisle with the king and his attendants, till Lord Drummond lost
all patience, and roughly summoned them.

"Effie--Maggie--by my soul, ye have gone to sleep, I think--come,
arouse ye there!" he exclaimed.

Then the young king went softly over and touched Margaret on the
shoulder.

She did not stir; neither did she seem to feel him.

"Sybilla--Euphemia!" said he.

But there was no answer.

For those three kneeling figures were stone dead!

* * * * * * *




CHAPTER LXXI.

CONCLUSION.

  "I never liked the landsman life, the earth is aye the same
  Gie me the ocean for my dower, my vessel for my hame.
  When life's last sun gangs feebly doon, and death comes to the door,--
  When a' the world's a dream to us, we'll go to sea no more,
  No more--we'll go to sea no more!"--_Scottish Song_.


Lord Drummond lived to see one of his daughters become a countess,
and the other in a fair way to wear a coronet; for little Lady
Beatrix grew a beautiful woman, and in after years became the
Countess of James Earl of Arran, commander of the Scots in the French
and Danish wars; while Elizabeth was wedded to the war-like Master of
Angus, who fell at Flodden, with two hundred knights and gentlemen,
all of the great and gallant Douglas' name; and could the proud old
lord have had a vision of her descendants, his ambitious heart would
have swelled with joy, for her grand-daughter, Margaret, became the
mother of Henry, King of Scotland, from whom the kings of Britain,
France, Spain, Prussia, and the emperors of Germany, are descended.

After the horrible catastrophe which closed our last chapter, we at
first intended to have said no more; but as this narrative has
partaken much more of the character of a veritable history than a
romance, a few parting words are necessary, before we say farewell to
those who have accompanied us so far.

The historians of later times have revealed to us what was then
unknown,--that the unhappy Margaret Drummond was, as Robert Douglas
has it, "_taken away to make room for a daughter of England_," and
that her two elder sisters perished with her.

In their bridal wreaths and veils each was interred, with a golden
chalice on her breast, in that old cathedral aisle; and there they
sleep, side by side, where for many years solemn masses were said
over them, until the belief in such things passed away.

Three blue slabs cover them, and mossy ruins and grassy graves are
around them.  The Allan murmurs by unchanged; but the trees that
shade it are old now, and they moan as they shake their rustling
leaves in the wind that comes from the distant Grampians.  Few now
know the stones that mark the graves of the three hapless
sisters--the three beautiful Drummonds; for it is often the way of
the world, that those whose couch in life has been decked with every
splendour, have their bed of eternity forgotten and neglected.

Neither David Falconer nor Robert Barton died of broken hearts, as
the heroes of romance might have done; but broken hearts were as
little in fashion then as now.  They sorrowed long and deeply, like
noble and true-hearted men, and they never married.

Barton was knighted, and became comptroller of the royal household;
the arquebussier, as we are informed by Buchanan, was slain at the
head of the Royal Guard, of which he was captain, when covering the
retreat of the king's artillery at the siege of Tantallon.  He was
then a man well up in years, being past his seventieth birthday; and
when his body was stripped and plundered by the Douglas troopers,
there were found, in a little bag at his neck, an Agnus Dei, a lock
of hair, a ring, and a medal.

The ring and the lock of hair belonged to Sybilla Drummond, and the
medal was the gift of King James IV.  Some monks of North Berwick
found the body as it lay on the highway; and though it had ever been
Sir David's wish to lie in Dunblane, they buried him in the Auld-kirk
close by the sea, which is now washing its burying-ground away.

The reader will naturally suppose that after achieving the
long-desired wish of the English faction, in removing the unfortunate
Margaret, the enterprising Lairds of Sauchie and Kyneff ultimately
obtained their peerages; but such was not the case,--_why_, we are
not in a position to state, for no doubt they, or their descendants,
would have shone conspicuously in that black list of political
traitors who broke the heart of King James V.

Sir Andrew Wood of Largo survived to see the early part of the reign
of James V.  He was then in extreme old age; and after a long career
of faithful service and brilliant achievement, and after fighting his
old ship, the _Yellow Caravel_, as long as her timbers held together,
he retired to the Castle of Largo, in and around which Cuddie
Clewline, the coxswain of his barge, Willie Wad, the gunner, Archy of
Anster, the boatswain, and nearly all his crew, were located; for the
Scottish Nelson lived in his old age, and died, when the hour came,
like a true Scottish Trunnion.

When he grew feeble and unable to ride to Largo Kirk, where Father
Zuill was chaplain, and where he long strove in vain to achieve the
development of the parabolic speculum of Marcellus, it was proposed
to make a litter, wherein his old shipmates might convey him on their
shoulders.

"Nay, nay, Robbie Barton," said he, "I ken nothing of how to navigate
such a craft; every man to his trade,--the gunner to his lintstock,
the steersman to his helm, and the cook to the foresheet.  Gadzooks,
I shall be rowed in my barge as of yore!"

From the northern gate of Largo Castle he had a canal cut through a
wooded hollow to Largo Kirk, and along this he was rowed every Sunday
by his old barge's crew, with Cuddie in the prow, bearing a
boat-hook, and keeping a look-out ahead, and an admiral's broad
pennon floating in the water astern.

The remains of this canal are still distinctly visible at Upper
Largo; and along that watery path, when his years were full, his
remains were rowed by torchlight to the venerable fane where his tomb
is yet to be seen; and where now he sleeps, with his compass, his
cross-staff, sword, and whistle, in his coffin; and so he passed
away, "believing and hoping," as he said to those who wept around
him, "that when piped up aloft at the last muster-day, he would be
able to give as good an account of his steerage, variation, and
leeway in life, as ever he had done in the longest voyage of the dear
old _Yellow Frigate_--God bless every plank of her!"

Such were the last words of the brave old Laird of Largo.




NOTES.

1.  Concerning Lady Margaret Drummond, a long and interesting note
will be found in Tytler's admirable _History of Scotland_, vol. iv.
The king became deeply attached to her at an early period.  In his
first Parliament she was voted an allowance for dresses.  Douglas, in
his Peerage, stated that she was poisoned in 1501; "great mystery,"
says Mr. Tytler, "hangs over the death of this royal favourite."

In Moreri's _Dictionary_, it is stated that John, first Lord
Drummond, "had four daughters, one of whom, named Margaret, was so
much beloved by James IV., that he wished to marry her; but as they
were connected by blood, and a dispensation from the Pope was
required, the impatient monarch concluded a private marriage, from
which clandestine union sprang a daughter, who became the wife of the
Earl of Huntly.  The dispensation having arrived, the king determined
to celebrate his nuptials publicly; but the jealousy of some of the
nobles against the house of Drummond, suggested to them the cruel
project of taking off Margaret by poison, in order that her family
might not enjoy the glory of giving two queens to Scotland.

"Certain it is, that Margaret Drummond, with Euphemia and the Lady
Sybilla, her sisters, died suddenly at the same time, with symptoms
exciting a strong suspicion of poison, which it was thought had been
administered to them at breakfast.  Sir Walter Drummond, Lord Clerk
Register, their paternal uncle, was at the time, Dean of Dunblane, a
circumstance which seems to have led to their interment there, the
family having lately removed from Stobhall, their original seat, on
the banks of the Tay, to Drummond Castle, where probably they had no
place of internment."

James IV. appears never to have forgotten her, for down to the end of
his life, are entries in the Treasurer's accounts of the payments
made to the two priests who sung masses for her soul in Dunblane.


2.  Concerning the story told by the boatswain in Chapter X., I may
mention, that in Ogilby's _Africa_, a gigantic folio work, published
in "the White Fryers, London, 1670," will be found a curious
description of the Guanchos, and their mode of preserving the dead,
which agrees entirely with the description thereof given by the
shipmate of our admiral.  The idea of the chalked ship sailing _off_
the wall is not original, for I remember once hearing a soldier tell
some such story to his comrades as they sat round a guard-room fire,
on a cold winter night in North America.


3.  I may remark, that though I have rather anticipated the time of
Sir Andrew Wood's two battles, for the purposes of my own story, I
have striven on the details of them, and everywhere else, to adhere
closely to history, to character, and to costume, &c., and to those
who are curious in the matter, much information concerning the
admiral will be found in _Tait's Magazine_ for April and May, 1852.
"He was," says Tytler, "an enterprising and opulent merchant, a brave
warrior, and skilful naval commander, an able financialist,
intimately acquainted with the management of commercial transactions,
and a stalwart feudal baron."  He died about the year 1510, and left
several sons, one of whom became a senator of the College of Justice.
There is still remaining a circular tower of the castellated dwelling
erected by the brave old admiral.  A tablet, bearing an inscription
to his memory, and an extract from his charter, was inserted in the
mouldering wall by the late General Durham; on the summit of the ruin
was one of the iron thirty-two pounders recovered from the wreck of
the _Royal George_, which pointed towards the sandy shore and
beautiful bay of Largo, and formed a characteristic monument to the
stout old captain of the _Yellow Caravel_.

The cannon is now placed in front of the modern mansion-house, but
the white marble slab yet remains above the door of the old one, and
is inscribed as follows:--

  "This Tablet was placed by
  GENERAL JAMES DURHAM, of Largo,
  In the year M.DCCC.XXXII.
  To remind posterity that
  These are the remains of the Royal Residence,
  Granted with the lands of Largo, by

  JAMES THE THIRD

  _To His Admiral Sir Andrew Wood,_

  Who repaired and strengthened the Fortalice
  By the hands of Englishmen captured by him
  This donation from his grateful Sovereign
  Was the well merited reward
  Of his brave and generous conduct,
  In successfully defending,
  At his own private expense,
  The seas and shores of Scotland
  From the otherwise unconquered Navy of England;
  Or, as his charter bears:
  'Propter servicia tam per terram quam per mare,
  in pace et in guerra, gratuiter impensa.'"


Sir Alexander Durham of Largo, Lord Lyon King-at-Arms, acquired the
estate of Largo Anno Dom. 1659.







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE YELLOW FRIGATE ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
